
The glorious Sugreeva made the following reply, which was intended to expel his
grief, to Rama the son of Dasaratha who felt miserable with anguish.

"Oh, hero! Why are you lamenting thus, as any other ordinary man? Do not be
sorrowful like this. Abandon your grief, as an ungrateful man abandons friendship."

"As the information about Seetha has since been gathered, I do not indeed see any
scope for your grief Oh, Rama!"

"Oh, Rama! You are a wise person, a knower of sacred works, an intellectual and a
learned man. Give up these ordinary apprehensions like a man whose spirit is disciplined gives up
ideas which spoil the purpose.

"We shall make our way up to Lanka, by crossing the ocean filled with large
crocodiles. We shall destroy your enemy."

"All action get dissipated by a person who is non-enthusiastic, depressed and
disturbed with grief. Such a person gets into troubles too."

"These leaders of monkey squads are gallant and efficient in all ways. They are
enthusiastic even to enter a fire for your sake. I understand this from their joy and my reasoning
too is sound."

"You ought to act in every way that I may be able to get back Seetha, after
destroying by an attack the enemy Ravana of sinful deeds."

"You take steps in such a way that a bridge is constructed across the sea and we
reach that city of the king of ogres."

"Be certain that Ravana is killed, once he is seen in a battle and on our seeing
that city of Lanka standing on a peak of the Trikuta Mountain."

"Without building a bridge across the sea, the dreadful abode of Varuna (the god of
water), Lanka cannot be defeated even by gods and demons including Indra."

"Know that when the whole of my army crosses the sea as a bridge is built across it,
they will come out victorious, because these monkeys who are able to change their form at will are
indeed valiant in battle."

"Therefore, take away your apprehensive mind, which destroys any enterprise for
grief in this world diminishes the might of a man, Oh king!"

�Cling to the practice of boldness, ought to be resorted to by a man. It will
produce competence without doubt to the doer quickly."

"Prevail upon the strength with alertness at this moment, Oh highly intelligent
prince! Grief for something lost or destroyed consumes all resources of even the strong and
magnanimous men like you."

"You are the foremost among the intelligent and the knower of all sacred texts.
Hence, you ought to defeat the enemy, with allies like me."

"I do not indeed see any one who can withstand you in a battle filed in the three
worlds, when you are armed with a bow, Oh Rama!"

"You work duly entrusted to the monkeys will not be spoiled. You shall behold Seetha
era imperishable sea."

"Oh, Lord of the earth! Desist from this melancholy. Yield to your legitimate
indignation. Unadventurous Kshatriyas (members of warrior-tribe) never win honor but all fear the
wrathful."

"You with your resourceful mind, along with us together, ponder over now a design to
cross the sea, the terrible Lord of rivers."

"Know victory to be certain, once the sea has been crossed by the army. Verily when
all my forces have passed over the sea our triumph is assured!"

"These monkeys, the courageous soldiers who are able to change their form at their
volition, will crush their opponents with an avalanche of rocks and trees."

"Once we have crossed the sea (the abode of Varuna) by whatever the means employed,
Ravana is as definitely killed in my eyes, Oh exterminator of enemies!"

What is the use of all these words? By all means, you will be a victorious man. I
see good omens and my heard is over thrilled with joy."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the words of Ravana the king of demons and the growls of Kumbhakarna,
Vibhishana spoke the following friendly and meaningful words to Ravana the foremost king of
ogres:

"By whom, O, king, has been wrapped around your neck, this great serpent of gigantic
body called Sita, with heap of expended hoods as her bosom, having poison as her anxiety and with
sharp fangs as her sweet smile and with five hoods as her five fingers."

"Even before the monkeys with their body size as mountain peaks, having their teeth
and nails as weapons, rush full upon the city of Lanka, give back Sita to Rama."

"Even before arrows resembling thunder bolts and with a speed equal to wind,
dispatched by Rama, take away the heads of chiefs of demons, give back Sita to Rama."

"O, king! Either Kumbhakarna or Indrajit and either Mahaparsva or Mahodara and
either Nikumbha or Kumbha or even Atikaya cannot withstand Rama in battle."

"Even if you are protected by the sun god, or by Maruts (storm gods) nor even seated
in the lap of Indra or god of Death nor if you have penetrated into the regions of heaven or under
the earth you will not be spared by the arrows of Rama."

Hearing the words of Vibhishana, Prahasta spoke as follows: "We are not knowing of
fear at all. We do not have fear of either celestials or demons at any time."

"We do not have fear from Yakshas (demi- gods) or Gandharvas (celestial musicians)
or eminent Nagas (serpent demons) or from birds and reptiles on the field of battle. When such is
the case, how can we have fear from Rama, the son of a human king at any time in battle?"

Vibhishana who desired the welfare of the king and who possessed a stable mind in
virtue wealth and pleasure, after hearing the inimical words of Prahasta, spoke highly meaningful
words as follows:

"O, Prahasta! The series of actions king or Mahodara as also yourself and
Kumbhakarna propose to take against Rama are impossible of being accomplished, any more than going
to heaven by wicked minded persons."

"How is it possible by me or by you or by all the demons to kill Rama, who is expert
in all matters, any more than a person without a bark to cross a great ocean."

"Even the celestials would feel bewildered when placed in front of the king Rama who
gives priority to righteousness, is a great car warrior, was born in the dynasty of Ikshvaku and is
capable of accomplishing his objects."

"O, Prahasta! The sharp arrows discharged by Rama, which are furnished with heron's
feathers and are dangerous to be approached, have not yet penetrated, duly piercing, your body.
That is why, you indulge in a boastful talk."

"The sharp and fatal arrows, discharged by Rama with the speed of a thunderbolt,
have not yet penetrated, duly splitting your body. That is why; you are indulged in a boastful
talk."

"Ravana or Triseersha, with great strength or Nikumbha the son of Kumbhakarna or
Indrajit or yourself are not capable to withstand Rama, who is equal in strength to Indra, in
battle."

"Even Devantaka or Narantaka or Atikaya or Atiratha of gigantic proportions, or
Akampana who is mighty as an ocean are not capable to withstand against Rama in battle."

"This king who is overcome by evil addictions, * is rude in nature and acts
inconsiderately. Such a king is being surrounded as a caucus by you who are his companions taking
the form of his enemies for the ultimate destruction of demons."

"You lift up and release this king, who has been wrapped forcibly by a terrific and
exceedingly strong snake of boundless proportions having thousand hoods and make him completely
free."

"All the well-wishers who are getting their desires fulfilled by the king, should
come together and protect the king by coercion even by pulling his hair if necessary as one who is
taken ossession of by evil spirits with terrific strength, is protected by one's kith and kin."

"This Ravana, for his part who is going to be enveloped forcibly by an ocean in the
shape of Rama - which is full of excellent water (who possesses excellent moral character) and who
is about to fall into the mouth of Patala (the nethermost subterranean region) in the shape of
Rama, is fit to be rescued united by you."

"I am telling these right and wholesome words, as per my opinion, to this city and
the demons inhabiting in it as well as to the king and his well wishers: Let Sita be given back to
Rama."

"A counselor is he, who after knowing the strength of the enemies and that of his
own (master) and even so duly grasping with his intellect, the status quo, fall, or rise in
military power like-wise on both sides, renders advice which is appropriate to the interest of his
king."
undefined
undefined
undefined

The valiant army-chiefs of monkeys stayed on Suvela mountain for that night and saw
the garden and groves in Lanka.

Seeing those gardens which were levelled, beautiful, spacious, majestic and
enchanting to look at, they became astonished.

Thick with Champaka, Ashoka, Vakula Sala and palmyra trees, covered with groves of
Tamala and Panasa trees, surrounded with rows of Nagakesara trees, Lanka looked splended on all
sides like the city of Amaravati reigned by Indra the god of celestials, with green lawns and
variegated avenues and with beautiful trees of various kinds like Hintala, Arjuna, Nipa Saptaparna
in full flowering, Tilaka, Karnikara and Patal whose crests were laden with flowers and which were
intertwined with climbers laden with multi-coloured flowers and red tender leaves.

The trees there were laden with fragrant and greatly enchanting flowers and fruits,
as human beings were laden with ornaments.

That garden, which bore flowers and fruits in relation to all seasons and with full
of bees, like chaitraratha (garden of Kubera, the god of riches), was quite charming, like Nandana
(garden of Indra the Lord of celestials)

In that garden abounding in cascades, the songs of birds like gallinules,
lapwings(small white cranes), dancing peacocks and cuckoos were heard.

Then, those monkeys, thrilling with rapture, delighted, brave and assuming any shape
at will, entered the aforesaid groves and gardens, with birds ever excited with joy, wandered by
bees, with clusters of trees occupied by cuckoos, having variegated sounds of birds and song of the
large bees, abounding with sounds of ospreys, with the music of wagtails and cries of canes.

While those mighty and splendid monkeys were entering the groves a breeze with
flowery fragrance, delightful to the nose, blew.

Some other troop-leaders of the valiant monkeys came out of their troops with due
permission from sugreeva and went towards Lanka, the city adorned with flags

Those monkeys, great in making noises causing the birds to frighten and displeasing
to the animals and elephants, went, causing that Lanka to tremble, by their noises.

Those monkeys with great speed marched ahead, making the earth flattened by their
feet and the dust thus raised by their feet went up instant aneously.

Frightened by that sound, bears lions buffaloes elephants, deers and birds were
trembled and terrified and hastened towards ten different directions.

The solitary peak of Trikuta mountain, which is so high as if touching the sky, all
over covered with flowers entirely, resembling gold; to an extent of eight hundred miles; bright;
charming to look at, beautiful, glorious, majestic, inaccessible even by birds, hard to be ascended
by people may, even by the mind-how much more by an act of walking?

Lanka, ruled by Ravana, with a breadth of eighty mile and a length of one hundred
sixty miles, was located on the apex of the mountain there.

The city of Lanka looked beautiful with its towering City-gates resembling white
clouds as well as with golden and silver ramparts.

The city of Lanka, greatly adorned by palaces and seven storied mansions, looked
like the sky with clouds at the end of a summer and as a region of Vishnu (the god of preservation)
between earth and heaven.

A palace, duly graced with a thousand pillars, which looked like a peak of Mount
Kailasa was three in the City of Lanka, which was always the City of Lanka, which was always
protected by a complete army of demons. The palace seemed to be scraping the skies and was to be
seen as an ornament to the City of Ravana.

The glorious Rama the elder brother of Lakshmana along with monkeys saw that
charming golden city of Ravana, graced with mountains picturesque with various minerals, splendid
with gardens reechoing with songs of birds of every kind, frequented by varieties of deer, richly
endowed with various kinds of flowers, inhabited by demons of every degree and duly flourishing,
having increased its wealth.

Beholding that City, which looks like heaven and crammed with huge palaces, the
valiant Rama the elder brother of Lakshmana was seized with astonishment.

Rama with his great army saw that City, full of precious gems, having all kinds of
facilities, adorned with rows of mansions, having excellent doors with huge mechanical appliances
and with a large armed forces protecting the City.
undefined
undefined
undefined

While Rama, the son of Dasaratha, crossed the ocean along with his army, the
illustrious Ravana spoke to Shuka and Sarana, his ministers as follows:

"The entire army of monkeys crossed the impassable ocean. The construction of the
bridge, unprecedented, across the ocean was executed by Rama."

"I am not able to believe under any circumstances that a pass-way has been
constructed across the ocean. Certainly, that army of monkeys is worth to be counted (carried
weight) by me."

"Become unrecognisable to others, enter the army of monkeys and make out the real
quantum of their army, their prowess, as to which monkeys are important among them, which ministers
of Rama and Sugreeva have come together, which monkeys are abiding in front, which monkeys are
valiant, how that bridge was constructed across the ocean full of water, how the encamping is done
for those great-souled monkeys; the determination, strength and the striking senses of Rama and of
the heroic Lakshmana."

"Knowing also accurately who the Chief of Army of those high-souled monkeys is, you
have to come back quickly."

Having thus been commanded by Ravana, the valiant demons Shuka and Sarana , both in
the disguise of monkeys, entered that army of monkeys.

Shuka and Sarana were not able to count then that inconeviable army of monkeys,
causing their hair to stand on end.

That army was stationed on the tops of mountains, round about the waterfalls, in the
caves, on the sea-shores, in the woodlands and in the gardens. It was either in the process of
crossing the ocean, or was intending to cross it in its entirety. It had either encamped or was
still encamping, making a terrible noise. The two demons saw that very strong and imperturbable sea
of army.

Vibhishana with great splendour beheld both of them in disguise. He caught hold of
Shuka and Sarana and told Rama as follows:

"O, Rama the conqueror of hostile citadels! These two demons are Shuka and Sarana,
the ministers of Ravana and they came here as spies from Lanka."

Both of them, having seen Rama, were trembled with fear, without any hope for their
lives and having joined their palms, spoke the following words:

"O, excellent man! O, Rama! We both of us, as sent by Ravana, came here together to
know everything about your entire army."

Hearing their aforesaid words, Rama the son of Dasaratha who was interested in the
welfare of all beings, smilingly spoke the following words:

"Has the entire army been observed by you? Have you observed us well? Have you
accomplished the task, as entrusted to you? If so, you may go back now according to your free
will."

"Even if you have not seen something you may see it now also. Otherwise, Vibhishana
will show it to you again entirely."

"You, having been caught, need not fear about your life. The captured messengers
holding no weapons indeed deserve no killing."

"O, Vibhishana! Always try to draw a bow-string on the opponents and not on these
two demons. Set them both, who are spies in disguise, free."

"When you return to the city of Lanka, repeat my words faithfully to Ravana the
younger half-brother of Kubera and the king of demons."

"That force on which you relied when you were taking away Seetha from me, display
that force at your will along with your troops and allies."

"Tomorrow, at break of day, you will see my arrows demolish the city of Lanka with
its ramparts and arches as well as the army of demons."

"O, Ravana! Tomorrow, at break of day I will cast my dreadful anger on you and your
army as Indra the Lord of celestials wielding a thunderbolt casts the thunderbolt on demons."

Receiving this command, the two demons, Shuka and Sarana, admiring his justice,
cried out: "May you be victorious!", reached the city of Lanka and spoke to Ravana as follows:

"O, king of demons! We were seized by Vibhishana with the intention of killing us.
But, Rama, the pious minded wose valour is immeasurable, seeing us, set us free."

"Where the four eminent persons who are equal to the protector of the worlds, the
valiant ones skilled in the use of weapons and of proven prowess namely Rama the son of Dasaratha,
the illustrious Lakshmana, the great resplendent Vibhishana and Sgreeva whose valour is equal to
Indra the Lord of celestials, arestationed at the same place, they can pluck up the city of Lanka
with its ramparts and arches and transplant it elswhere, even if all the monkeys keep aloof."

"Such is Rama's form and such are his weapons, that he can alone overthrow the city
of Lanka, his three other companious standing by."

"That army protected by Rama and Lakshmana as well as Sugreeva, are exceedingly
unconquerable even by all the gods and demons."

"Now, the army of the mighty monkeys, who are readily inclined to fight, consists of
cheerful warriors. Mae peace, insted of enmity with them. Restore Seetha to Rama."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Perceiving Ravana enraged, a very strong demon named Mahaparsva thought for a while
and with joined palms, spoke as follows:

"That man indeed is a fool, who after reaching a forest inhabited by wild beasts and
vicious elephants and having duly found honey, does not drink it."

"O,annihilator of enemies! Who is a lord to you, who are a lord of all? Setting your
foot upon the heads of your enemies, take pleasure with Sita."

"O, ruler endowed with a mighty prowess! Act in the mode of a cock, forcibly against
her. Enjoy that Sita, by charging on her again and again and revel with her."

"What fear will be there to you, after fulfilling your lust? All that comes or yet
to come will be prevented (by us)."

"Kumbhakarna and Indrajit of great might together with us are capable of keeping off
even Devendra (god of celestials), wielding the weapon of a thunderbolt."

"Overstepping the methods of giving away gifts or conciliation or even showing
dissention being followed by right men, I like accomplishment of actions through hostile
means."

"O, ruler endowed with great might! We shall make all your enemies reaching here to
surrender, by the power of our weapons. There is no doubt about it."

Appreciating the words spoken thus by Mahaparsva, King Ravana spoke the following
words:

"O, Mahaparsva! Know a little secret about me. I shall tell you an incident, which
occurred to me long ago."

"Once I saw a celestial nymph, Punjikasthala(by name) flashing like a flame,
concealing herself in the sky and proceeding towards the abode of Brahma."

"She was made unclothed by me and was enjoyed forcibly. Thereafter, appearing like a
crumpled lotus, she went to the abode of Brahma."

"I think that the matter was made known to the high soled Brahama and then the
enraged Brahma spoke to me the following words:

"From today onwards, if you revel with any other woman forcibly, your head then
undoubtedly will break asunder into a hundred pieces."

"Fearing the curse given in this manner by Brahama, I am not violently making Sita
the daughter of Videha, to mount on my beautiful bed forcibly."

"My swiftness is like that of an ocean. My movement is like that of a wind. Rama
does not know this and hence he is indeed having an encounter with me."

"If not otherwise, who wants to arouse me (for a combat) as one would awaken a lion
asleep, sitting at a place in a mountain cave or arouse into activity an enraged Death?"

"Rama did not see the arrows, looking like two tongued serpents, coming forth from
me. That is why he is marching against me for a battle"

"I shall blaze up Rama swiftly with my arrows in hundreds resembling thunder bolts
discharged from my bow, like tormenting an elephant with fire brands."

"Surrounded by great army, I shall take away that strength of Rama, as a rising sun
at dawn takes away radiance of the stars."

"Even Devendra (lord of celestials) with thousand eyes or Varuna (king of the
Universe) can not conquer me in battle. Once upon a time, this city of Lanka ruled by Kubera (Lord
of riches) was conquered by me with the power of my arms."
undefined
undefined
undefined

That famous army, well-protected by Neela, was kept stationed nicely at the northern
shore of the ocean.

Both Maina and Dvivida the distinguished monkeys there moved in all directions
through that army, for the purpose of vigilance.

After the army was settled at the sea-shore, Rama spoke to Lakshmana who was by his
side (as follows):

"It is so said that sorrow gets vanished at the passing of time. But my agony of not
seeing my beloved is getting increased every day."

"There is no anguish for me that my beloved is at a distance, nor that she was taken
away. Her age is indeed passing away. Only about this, I am repenting."

"Oh, wind! Flow from the side of my beloved. Touch her and touch me too. It is
through you that I get a contact of her limbs. It is through moon that I get a contact of her
eyes."

"That darling being carried away; might have cried "Oh, Lord!" Seeking for help.
That thought is like poison gulped by me, hovering in my stomach and scorching my limbs."

"My body is scorching night and day, by the fire of passion, holding fuel of my
separation from her and my thoughts of her flaring into shimmering flames."

"Oh, Lakshmana! Diving deep into the sea without you, I shall fall asleep. This
flaming passion will not thus scorch me, lying down in water.

"It is enough for me, who is passionate, that Seetha with charming thighs and myself
are resting on one the same earth and on this fact I am able to survive."

"Even as a paddy-field without water survives, by getting wet from a neighboring
paddy-field under water, I also survive since I am hearing her as surviving.

"When shall I behold Seetha with charming hips, having long lotus-like eyes
flourishing as prosperity, by conquering the enemies?"

"When, gently raising her face looking like louts, with its beautiful teeth and
lips, shall I drink as a sick man the sovereign drink of remedy?"

"When will those breasts which are delightful close, bulging and quivering, looking
like palmary fruits, indeed press me?"

"She, with dark-cornered eyes, who has fallen into the midst of demons, is surely
not getting any defender, she resembling an orphan, though I am her support."

"How Seetha the daughter of King Janaka, my darling and Dasaratha's daughter-in-law
is sleeping among ogresses?"

"Seetha will come out, driving away (through my force) the unassailable demons, as
driving away black clouds by a digit of the moon, in autumn."

"Seetha, who by nature is slender, will undoubtedly become leaner further because of
her anguish, her abstinence from food and her adverse position of time and place."

"When shall I bring back Seetha, having lodged arrows in Ravana's chest and having
abandoned this mental agony?"

"When indeed Seetha the virtuous lady similar to the child of a celestial, with an
excited longing, will embrace my neck and release tears of joy?"

"When shall I thrillingly abandon this terrible anguish, born out of my separation
from Seetha so soon, as we abandon a soiled clothing?"

While that sagacious Rama was lamenting thus there, the sun, the weak-rayed due to
day-decline, approached the dusk.

Lakshmana consoled Rama who was overwhelmed with anguish, duly recollecting the
lotus-eyed Seetha. Thereafter, Rama worshipped the evening-twilight.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Touched with joy to hear the words rightly spoken by Hanuman, Rama replied as
follows: -

"A very outstanding work, the most arduous in the world has been done by Hanuman,
which could not be carried out even in thought by any other on the surface of this earth."

"Indeed, I cannot perceive as such anyone other than Garuda (chief of the feathered
race and vehicle of Lord Vishnu), wind- god and Hanuman, who can cross the mighty ocean."

"Who can return alive, having entered (once) taking refuge only in self- command,
the city of Lanka, which is unconquerable by gods demons and Yakshas and even by Gandharvas, Nagas
and ogres and well under the custody of Ravana?"

"Who is able to capture that citadel, by assault, that is exceedingly dangerous to
be attacked and which is powerfully guarded by ogres, but one whose courage and valour are equal to
Hanuman's?"

"A great act of service has been done by Hanuman to Sugriva thus by exhibiting his
strength corresponding to his pace."

"That servant to whom his master entrusts a difficult task and who performs it with
zeal is said to be a superior person."

"The one who is ready and capable but who yet does no more than his master extracts
from him is called a mediocre person."

"The one who is well and able and yet does not carry out the instructions of his
master as directed is said to be the least of men ."

"Through the discovery of Sita's retreat by this faithful messenger, Hanuman has
fulfilled the task entrusted to him unfalteringly to the satisfaction of Sugriva and hence there
was no diminution to his self."

"By finding out Sita, the Raghu dynasty as well as myself and the valiant Lakshmana
too, have been rightly saved today."

"But it squeezes my conscience further, hopeless as I am, to think that I am not
able to do a pleasant act befittingly to the bearer of these good tidings."

"Let me at least embrace this magnanimous Hanuman since in the present
circumstances, this is all that is easily obtained from me."

Thus saying, Rama vibrating with joy, clasped Hanuman in his arms who, master of
himself, his mission fulfilled, had returned.

After reflecting a while, Rama the great scion of Raghus, again spoke as follows,
Sugriva the ruler of monkeys too listening attentively.

"The search for Sita has been performed so much well in all ways. But my mind gets
dejected once more, when I behold this vast ocean."

How can these monkeys put together will reach the southern bank of the ocean, which
is so difficult to cross and which contains voluminous water?"

"Having received the tidings of Sita, what can now be done to take the monkeys to
the farther side the sea?"

Thus speaking to Hanuman, Rama the destroyer of enemies and the mighty armed, was
filled with apprehension and then became absorbed in thought.
undefined
undefined
undefined
The evil- minded Ravana the ten-faced monster, who had fallen under the sway of Death; 
could not brook that beneficial advice tendered by Malyavan.
He had fallen under the sway of anger, knitting his brows on the face as he was, rolling 
his eyes in fury and spoke to Malyavan (as follows)
"I have closed my ears to the speech you have made, albeit with good intentions and even 
by taking sides with the enemy."
"How can you hold Rama, who is a mere human being, a small feeble man, taking help from 
monkeys and dwelling in a forest having been abandoned by his father, to be a competent person?"
"How can you hold me, the Lord of demons, terrifying celestials and possessing all powers 
in full, to be a weaker person?"
"I suspect that you spoke these harsh words to me because of your envy of my prowess 
or your partiality towards the enemies or my lenience towards you."
"Which learned man, understand the truth in the scriptures, would speak thus harshly 
to a mighty person in power, were it not to instigate him?"
"Why should I give back Seetha, who is like Lakshmi the goddess of fortune without the 
lotus, having brought her away from the forest, through fear of Rama?"
"See Rama killed within a few days by me, along with Lakshama together with Sugreeva 
in the midst of crores of monkeys."
"How should this Ravana, whom in combat, the celestials themselves dare not meet in a 
duel, entertain fear in this encounter?"
"Rather would I be cut into two pieces than bend before anybody! Such was I from birth, 
it is my nature by difacult and unalterable."
"What great marvel is there in that which gave way to terror if by happy chance, a bridge 
indeed was constructed by Rama across the ocean."
"That Rama along with his army of monkeys, having crossed the ocean, will not go back 
alive. It is my true promise to you."
Beholding Ravana to be highly excited and speaking with such fury, Malyavan, abashed, 
did not reply.
Invoking blessings of victory to the king as courtesy demanded Malyavan took permission 
and went home.
Ravana the demon on his part, assisted by his ministers having deliberated on the things 
to be examined, set about planning the defense of Lanka.
Thereafter, he assigned the eastern gate to the demon, Prahasta and the southern gate 
to Maha Parshva and Mhodara both of great prowess. At the western gate, he placed his son Indrajit, 
a powerful conjuror, with considerable force of demons.
Placing Shuka and Sarana at the northern city-gate, Ravana told his ministers that he 
would go there personally.
He place the demon Virupaksha, who was full of energy and courage, to be in the center 
of the fort, with a large number of demons.
Making an arrangement in Lanka in this manner, that bull among demons, under the sway 
of Time, deemed his purpose as accomplished.
Having ordered for adequate arrangements for the defence of the city, Ravana then let 
his ministers depart. Having been honoured with blessings of victory by the body of counsellors, he 
entered his mighty and sumptuous inner apartments.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the well-founded and highly reasonable words of Sugreeva, Rama concurred
with him and spoke then to Hanuma as follows:

"I am competent of crossing this ocean by all means, either by way of austerity or
by forming a bridge or by drying up the ocean."

"Tell me how many citadels in Lanka are difficult of access, Oh, Hanuma! I desire to
know all that, as though viewed with an eye."

"You had the opportunity to catch a glimpse of the size of the army, the
fortification-details of the gates and citadels, the way in which Lanka was guarded and the various
mansions of ogres. Describe everything in accordance with facts, for you are skilled in all
ways."

Hearing the words of Rama, Hanuma the son of wind-god, who was excellent in the art
of expression, forthwith spoke once more to Rama as follows:

"Listen to me! I shall tell you everything-how the city of Lanka has been defended
by the various methods of fortification and how it has been guarded by the troops."

"I shall tell you the details of how the ogres are attached to their king, the
excellent prosperity of Lanka generated by the glory of Ravana, the awfulness of the ocean, the
division of the body of his forces and of animals like horses and elephants carrying his forces
other than the infantry." Saying so, Hanuma the foremost among monkeys, who knew the truth narrated
as follows.

"The great Lanka was rejoiced and gayful, full of elephants in rut, abounding in
chariots and inhabited by gangs of ogres."

"Four fairly big and extensive gates are fitted with strong doors along with huge
beams for locking those gates."

"Strong and mighty ballista capable of hurling darts and stones have been attached
to them. The enemy troops which arrive there are warded off by those catapults at the very
gates."

"Dangerous and sharp edged Sataghnis made of iron, forged by hordes of ogres, have
been kept in readiness in hundreds at the gates.

"A great rampart made of gold, which is difficult to assail with violence and is
inlaid at intervals with gems, corals, cat's eyes and pearls, encircle that Lanka."

"Most awe-inspiring and fathomless moats (deep trenches) of great splendor, filled
with cold water, infested with alligators and inhabited by fishes are there all round the
city."

"Anterior to the gateways, there are four very extensive draw-bridges, equipped with
numerous engines and furnished with many rows of buildings (built on the rampart and meant for
those entrusted with the duty of guarding the entrances)."

"Against the approach of the enemy forces there, the draw-bridges are protected by
the aforesaid engines and the enemy-battalions are flung into the moats on every side."

"The most important draw-bridge which is unshakable, firmly fastened very well and
strong, is dazzling with numerous gold pillars and pedestals."

"Ravana, inclined to war and endowed with powers of the state, himself remains alert
and in readiness to review the forces, Oh, Rama!"

"Lanka therefore is impregnable, it is a celestial citadel, that inspires terror.
Surrounded by water and built on a mountain, it has four fold defenses including forest and
artificial fortification."

"Lanka is situated on the other side of the ocean, which is difficult of access, Oh
Rama! It offers no passage for vehicles either and there is no proper communication from all
sides."

"That city of Lanka, resembling the city of Gods, is built on a mountain peak and is
inaccessible. That Lanka is abound with horses and elephants and is extremely difficult to
conquer."

Deep trenches and Sataghnis too as well as engines of war of every kind adorn Lanka
the city of wicked Ravana."

"Ten thousand ogres all carrying darts in their hands and warriors contending with
swords, who are difficult to assail, are positioned at the eastern gate."

"One hundred thousand of ogres, with an army of four limbs (viz. horses, foot
soldiers, elephants and chariots) are positioned at the southern gate of the city. Warriors
unsurpassed by others constitute that army."

One million troops arrived with shields and swords as well as proficient in the use
of all mystic missiles, are positioned at the western gate."

"A hundred millions of ogres, who are mounted in chariots or who ride on hoses, sons
of distinguished families and greatly honored, are positioned there at the northern gate."

"Moreover, ogres hundreds of thousands in number, difficult to attack, aggregating
to one and quarter of a crore of ogres are positioned at the central division."

"Those bridges were broken by me and the moats were filled up (with the wreckage).
The city of Lanka was burnt by me and the defensive walls were pulled down. A part of the army of
the gigantic ogres was destroyed."

"By some way or other, let us cross the ocean. The city of Lanka should be assumed
then as destroyed by the monkeys."

"Oh, Rama! What is the use for the rest of the forces to you? Angada, Divida,
Mainda, Jambavan, Panasa, Anala and Nila the commander-in-chief alone, by reaching that great city
of Ravana leaping and storming Lanka with its mountains and woods, moats and archways, protective
walls and buildings, will recover Seetha."

"Order quickly to get all the forces accumulated accordingly. Let us set out at the
appropriate moment."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Thereafter, an energetic demon named Shardula came and saw the army, commanded by
Sugriva, which was drawn up in a battle array.

That demon, the spy of Ravana the evil natured king of ogres, coolly observed that
army from all sides, speedily returned to Lanka and spoke to their king as follows:

"Boundless and immeasurable like another ocean, this multitude of monkeys and bears
is approaching Lanka.".

"These brothers Rama and Lakshmana, the sons of Dasaratha, the excellent and the
most dignified men endowed with beauty have arrived in the cause of Sita and settled in a camp
after reaching the sea shore" .

"O, monarch! Their army is employed around a radius of ten yojanas (eighty miles)on
all sides. You have to ascertain this truth quickly"

"O, monarch! Your other spies also ought to ascertain the fact quickly. Under such
circumstances, either conciliation or an act of giving away or sowing dissention (in the enemy's
ranks) may be employed."

Hearing Shardula's words Ravana the lord of demons was perturbed and immediately
determined his cause of action. Then he spoke the following words to a demon by name, Shuka the
foremost among those who know their duty.

"Going quickly, speak fearlessly to king Sugriva on my behalf, according to my
command, in an excellent and gentle voice, as follows:"

O, great king! You are indeed born in a noble family, possessor of a great strength
and are a son of Riksharaja. No gain whatsoever or any harm will accrue to you (from this battle)
.O, lord of monkeys! Nevertheless, you are like a brother to me."

"What does it matter to you, if I have embezzled the wife of a wise prince?
(Therefore) return to Kishkindha"

"This Lanka cannot be reached by monkeys in any way. It cannot be acquired even by
celestials and Gandharvas (celestial musicians), why to talk about men and monkeys?"

Then Shuka the demon heralded by Ravana turned himself into the form of a bird and
quickly flew into the sky.

Proceeding in the sky for a distance continuously over the ocean, Shuka then stood
up in the sky itself and spoke these words to Sugriva:

Shuka repeated all the words the wicked Ravana had told him to say to Sugriva. As he
was still speaking, the monkeys bounded into the air to reach him at that moment quickly to tear
off his wings and to smite him by their fists.

The demon thus attacked was forcibly seized by all the monkeys and immediately
brought down to the ground from the sky.

Shuka being harassed by monkeys spoke the following words: "O, Rama! Messengers are
not to be killed. Let your monkeys be restrained properly."

"That messenger, who by abandoning the opinion of his king will speak about his own
opinion though he being a messenger and he who on the other hand speaks that which was not told to
him, that messenger is indeed fit to be killed."

Hearing Shuka's complaining words, Rama spoke to the foremost of monkeys, who were
beating him as aforesaid, saying "Do not kill him"

Perceiving no fear from monkeys, Shuka became light winged, virtually standing in
the sky and spoke again the following words.

"O, Sugriva, rich in courage and possessing great strength and valor! What am I to
tell Ravana, whose nature is to cause world to cry?"

Hearing the aforesaid words, the mightily strong Sugriva the king of monkeys and the
foremost among them, with a merciless mind then spoke to the blame less Shuka, Ravana's spy, as
follows:

"O, Ravana, worthy of killing! You are not my companion. You are not worthy of
sympathy. You are not the person who helped me in any way. I do not like you, as you are Rama's
enemy. Hence, You are worthy to be killed like Vali, along with your associates"

"O, the king of demons! I am killing you along with your sons, relatives and other
kinsfolk. Arriving with a great army, I will reduce the entire Lanka and all of you to ashes."

"O, stupid Ravana! You along with your younger brother will not be left unkilled by
Rama, even if you are protected by all including Indra (the lord of celestials) or even if you have
disappeared (by virtue of conjuring trick) or obtained, the solar orbit or entered the nethermost
subterranean region or even if approached the lotus feet of Shiva (the lord of Kailasa
mountain)"

"I do not see any protector to you as such in the three worlds, nor do I see any
devilish being or a demon or a Gandharva (celestial musician) or an ogre coming forward to protect
you."

"You killed Jatayu, the king of vultures and who was senior to you in old age. Why
the wide-eyed Sita was not taken away in the presence of Rama and Lakshmana? Having made her
captive, you do not recognize her for what she is."

"You are unaware how strong, high soled and irresistible even to celestials, is this
Rama the excellent man of Raghu dynasty, who shall deprive you of your life."

Thereafter, Angada the son of Vali and the foremost of the monkeys spoke as follows:
"O, Sugriva the highly intelligent! He is not an ambassador. He appears to me as a spy."

"All our army has been indeed evaluated by him, standing here. Let him be made
captive. Let him not return to Lanka. This indeed finds favor with me."

Commanded then by the king Sugriva, the monkeys jumped up, seized and bound him, who
without defence, wailed loudly.

Harassed by those monkeys there, Shuka on his part cried loudly towards Rama, the
high soled son of Dasaratha as follows:

"My wings are being pulled out forcibly. My eyes are being pierced. If I die, all
the sins incurred by me between my birth and my death would fall to your share."

Hearing that lamentation of Shuka, Rama did not allow his killing by the monkeys.
Rama ordered monkeys to release him, as he came as an ambassador.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing those words, which were truthful and coward less, as spoken by Sarana, the
king Ravana spoke to Sarana as follows:

"I do not give Seetha even if the celestials, celestial musicians or demons attack
me or even if there is a terror from all the worlds."

"O, gentle one! As you were harassed very much by the monkeys and hence fearful; you
are thingking of giving back Seetha now itself as good."

"Which enemy can defeat me in battle?" The illustrious Ravana, the lord of demons,
causing the world to cry, spoke harsh words as aforesaid and then from there ascended the roof of
his palace which was shining white like his snow and which was equal to the height his snow and
which was equal to the height of several palmyrah trees, with a desire to see the army of
monkeys.

Ravana, stupefied with anger, along with his spies, saw that ocean, the mountains
and the forests and beheld the entire land completely filled with monkeys.

Seeing that great army of monkeys, which was boundless and intolerable, the king
Ravana asked Sarana as follows:-

"Which monkeys are important among them? Who are valiant ones? Who are the very
strong ones? Who will stay in front at all places, with great energy?"

"To whom Sugreeva will hear? Who are the generals of the commanders of the
monkey-heads? What is the influence of the monkeys? O, Sarana! Tell me all."

Then, Sarana who knew the chiefs of monkeys, spoke the following words about the
chiefs of the monkeys i them, to the lord of demons who was enquiring about them.

"He, the valiant one, who holds his arms high, who tramples the earth under his feet
as he marches, whose face is turned towards Lanka, who in fury is knitting his brows very much, who
is resembling a mountain- peak in stature, who is like filaments of a louts in hue, who is excess
of anger continuously lashes out his tail and the swish of which is heard in ten regions, he is the
prince named Angada, anointed by Sugreeva the king of monkeys and is challenging you to the
battle."

"He, the valiant one, who holds his arms high, who tramples the earth under his feet
as he marches, whose face is turned towards Lnaka, who in fury is knitting his brows very much, who
is remsebling amountain- peak in stature, who is like filaments ofa louts in hue, who is excess of
anger continuously lashes out his tail and the swish of hwich is heard in ten regious, he is the
prince named Angada, anointed by Sugreeva the king of monkeys and is challenging you to the
battle."

"This Angada, a worthy son of Vali and always dear to Sugreeva, is coming forwards
for Rama's interests, as Varuna is to Indra's."

"It is all due to Angada's design that Seetha was found by Hanuman, who is a swift
monkey and a well-wisher of Rama."

"This valiant Angada, bringing along with him innumerable cheifs of monkeys, is
approaching to crush you, with the help of his own army."

"Surrounded by a large army, here stands the valiant Nala the creator of the bridge,
next to Angada the son of Vali, prepared for the battle."

"These excellent monkeys, numbering a thousand crores and eight lakhs, lodging in
sandalwood groves, yelling with a lion's roar and having stiffened their limbs, are knitting their
eye=brows raised in anger. These valiant monkeys, who are terrific and fierceful having a feroceous
zeal are going after Nala. Nala himself with his aforesaid army aspires to smash Lanka
forthwith."

"A monkey called Sweta of sivlver hue who is quick-witted and cleaver, of terricfic
prowess and a warrior renowned in the three worlds, has come to Sugreeva swiftly, dividing the army
of monkeys and brining great delight to the troops, he goes back at once."

"There was mountain called Ramya, on the banks of River Gomati. That mountain filled
with various kinds of trees was also called Samrochana. An army-chief, named Kumuda used to roam
around that mountainous region. He also used to rule that kingdom. He is the leader for lakhs of
monkeys. He has a very long hair-coppery, yellow, pale and white and hideous to cook upon- thrown
about on his tail is the intrepid and fierceful monkey called Kanda. He yearns to fight and boast
that he with destroy Lanka his forces."

"O, king! He who resembles a tawny lion with a long mane and who is looking at Lanka
attentively as though he wishes to consume it with his glasses, who dwells mostly on the mountains
of Krishna and Sahya of Vindhya range of pleasing aspect, is the General named Rambha. Three
thousand crores of excellent monkeys, who are formidable of impetuous valour and vigour, surround
him who is marching ahead and follow in his goot-sets to destroy Lanka."

"O, king! Look! The one who is yawning continuously and shaking his ears, he who
does not have fear of death, he who never retreats from a battle, but violently moves with rage,
who again sees obliquely, he who lashes out his tail and roars like a lion with great vigour, he
who constantly dwells on the lovely Salveya mountain, he is Sarabha by name, the commander of
monkeys with immense energy and devoid of fear."

"O, king! All his one lakh and forty thousand army-chiefs called Viharas* are
strong.

"The one who is like a great cloud, enveloping the space and who stays in teh middle
of monkey-warriors like Indra the god of celestials, the great voice of whose monkeys wishing for
battle is heard like the roll of drums, is the General named Panasa, who is always invincible in
battle. He dwells in Pariyatra, a mountain that is exceeded by none in height."

Troop-commanders numbering fifty lakhs commanding separate units attend obediently
to him, who is excellent among the Generals."

"He who is encamped with sixty lakhs monkeys as his army-strength on the sea-shore
like unto a second ocean is the commander called Vinata who resembles Dardura mountain (in size)
and is positioned there lending charm to the formidable army marching ahead and moves about,
drinking the water of River Vena, the foremost of all rivers."

"A monkey called krathana, keeping the courageous, strong monkeys and the
army-lieutenants in separate units, is inviting you for the battle."

"That resplendent monkey who for his part nourishes his body having the hue of a red
chalk and proud of his strength, stands facing you with anger despising all other monkeys."

"Seventy lakhs monkeys are attending on him. He himself wishes to crush the city of
Lanka with the help of his army."

"These commanders and commanders-in-chief are difficult to be conquered and their
number is hard to be counted. Their troops are divided into distinct units."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Thereafter Rama, the annihilator of enemies, spreading sacred grass on the sea
shore, making a respectful salutation (by joining his palms) to the great ocean with his face
turned eastward, lied down with his arm, resembling the body of a snake , as his pillow.

His arm formerly adorned with armlets of gems and gold and the most excellent jewels
of pearls, was touched more than once, by excellent women ( Kausalya and other mothers or by royal
maids).

Formerly, his arm used to be tended with sandalwood and aloe and with saffron pastes
and made beautiful like the splendor of a rising sun.

In the past, the aforesaid arm was graced by the head of Seetha on the couch. It
resembled the body of Takshaka. (A snake) supported on the water of the Ganga.

The aforesaid arm resembled a yoke. It enhanced the grief of his enemies in battle.
It was delightful to his friends. It is now placed at the shore of the sea.

The aforesaid arm whose skin had been hardened by the strokes of the bow string, off
the left arm resembling a great mace and that mighty right arm that bestowed thousands of cows in
charity was used as a pillow. Rama, the competent man and the mighty armed said: " Either crossing
of the ocean or a death should occur to me today". Making that resolve he laid down by the ocean,
restraining his speech and with a pious disposition according to tradition.

Following the scriptural injunction, that Rama who was devoted to his sacred vow,
while sleeping on the ground spread with Kusha grass, spent a time of three nights there.

Remaining there for three nights, Rama who was skilled in policy and fond of piety,
waited upon the ocean, the lord of rivers.

Though honored according to his worth by the self subdued Rama, the careless ocean
did not appear in his personal form to Rama.

Rama becoming angry with the ocean, having the outer corners of his eyes turned red,
spoke those words to Lakshmana, having auspicious marks, who was in his vicinity:

"O, what arrogance of the ocean, who does not appear himself personally before me!
Indeed calmness, forbearance kind spoken ness and straight -forwardness- these qualities of noble
men give weak results, when directed towards those having no virtues."

"This world honors that man, who boasts himself, is corrupt and shameless, runs
about in all directions advertising himself and commits every kind of excess"

"O, Lakshmana! In this world, it is not possible to obtain fame, glory or victory at
the end of a battle, by conciliation"

"O, Lakshmana! Behold now this ocean, having its water made suffocated soon with its
crocodiles floated on all sides and broken asunder by my arrows".

"See here, O, Lakshmana, the coils of water snakes, the huge bodies of alligators
and the trunks of sea elephants being shattered by me."

"I will make the ocean with its multitude of conches, oyster shells, fishes and
crocodiles, dry up now in this great battle"

"This ocean is considering me as an incapable man endowed as I am with forbearance.
It is a great mistake to show forbearance to such an individual."

"The Ocean is not appearing himself before me on kind words. O, Lakshmana! Bring the
bow and the serpentine arrows. I shall dry up this ocean, so that our monkeys can cross it by
feet."

"Being provoked now, I will shake this ocean, even if it is unshakable. I will force
the ocean, which is demarcated by banks and agitated with thousands of waves, bereft of a boundary,
by my arrows. I will agitate the great ocean, thronged with great demons."

Speaking as aforesaid, Rama with his eyes made larger by anger and wielding a bow
with his hand, became dreadful to look at, as a blazing fire at the end of the world.

Swaying his terrific bow and making the earth tremble by his violence Rama released
the arrow resembling a powerful thunderbolt of Indra. (god of celestials).

Those excellent arrows having a great speed and ablaze by their splendor, penetrated
the waters of the ocean, striking the water- snakes with terror.

The great jerk of water with fishes and alligators of the ocean, together with the
resonance of the wind became very much dreadful.

Immediately that great ocean, became shaken by the cluster of huge waves enveloped
by a multitude of conches in its rolling waves and a smoke came out.

Sea-snakes having brilliant faces and glittering eyes and the very valiant demons
residing in nethermost subterranean region of the sea, were perturbed.

Thousands of waves, so large resembling Vindhya and Mandhara mountains, jumped up
from the sea with its crocodiles and sea monsters.

That ocean with its multitude of fluctuating waves, with its frightened serpents and
demons, with huge crocodiles coming out, became full of noise.

Then Lakshmana rushed towards Rama who in a terrific velocity was stretching his
incomparable bow, with a penetrating sigh, crying: "No further, no farther" and took hold of the
bow.

"O, honorable man! Even without the destruction of the ocean, the purpose of you the
greatest hero will be fulfilled. Men like you do not fall into the sway of anger. You see some
durable and noble alternative"

Brahmana-sages and celestial sages, stationed in the interior of the sky cried in a
loud voices, saying "No farther, no farther" and making a noise "Ah,Oh,Alas!"
undefined
undefined
undefined

While the assurance of protection having been given to Rama, the highly sagacious
Vibhishana the brother of Ravana bent down and glanced towards the earth.

The virtuous Vibhishana descended joyously from the sky to the ground along with his
faithful companions and alighted in the vicinity of Rama.

Thereafter, Vibhishana along with the four demons fell prostrate and spoke to Rama
the following words which were equitable suitable and delightful.

"I am the younger brother of Ravana and was humiliated by him. I sought refuge in
you, who are the refuge for all the beings."

"Abandoning Lanka, friends and possessions, I place my kingdom, life and happiness
at your disposal."

Hearing those words of Vibhishana, Rama in a soothing tone and with a refreshing
look in his eyes, spoke these words: "Tell me really the strengths and weaknesses of the
demons."

Thus asked then by Rama who was unwearied in action, Vibhishana started telling
about the detailed strength of Ravana.

"O, prince! Because of a special boon given by Brahma (lord of creation), Ravana can
not be killed by all beings, Gandharvas (celestial musicians), serpents, and birds."

Kumbhakarna, my elder brother born after Ravana, who is valiant and highly powerful,
has enough strength to fight against Indra (Lord of celestials) in battle.

"O, Rama! You might have heard about Prahasta, his chief of army. He defeated
Manibhadra in a battle on the mountain of Kailasa."

"When furnished with gloves made of the skin of Iguana (to prevent injury from the
bowstring) and when clad in armor that no arrow can pierce, that Indrajit (son of Ravana) standing
in battle wielding a bow, becomes invisible."

"O, Rama! The glorious Indrajit, having propitiated the God of Fire, strikes his
enemy while remaining invisible in the battle field with a huge battle array (on both sides)"

"Mahodara and Mahaparsva along with a demon called Akampana who are equal to the
guardians of the world in battle - they are the commanders of his army."

"In the city of Lanka, are residing ten thousand crore demons, who can assume any
form at will and who consume flesh and blood as their staple food"

"King Ravana along with those demons made war against the guardians of the earth.
Those guardians of the earth along with the celestials were defeated by the wicked Ravana."

Hearing the aforesaid words of Vibhishana, Rama scrutinized them all attentively and
spoke the following words:

"O, Vibhishana! I indeed know those feats standing to the credit of Ravana, which
were told by you, as true."

"After killing Ravana along with Prahasta and his son (Indrajit), I will make you
the king. Hear this truth from me."

"Ravana may well plunge into Rasaatala (the penultimate subterranean region) or even
Paataala (the nethermost subterranean region) or seek the presence of Brahma and he will not be
left alive by me."

"I will not enter Ayodhya without killing Ravana together with his sons, companions
and relatives in battle. I take oath on my three brothers."

Hearing the words of that Rama, who was unwearied in action, the right minded
Vibhishana saluted him by bowing his head and started telling as follows:

"I will extend my help in killing the demons and in attacking the city of Lanka.
According to my strength, I will also penetrate into the army of the adversary to fight."

Rama on his part, duly delighted, embraced Vibhishana who was speaking as aforesaid
and spoke to Lakshmana as follows: "Bring some water from the ocean."

"O, Lakshmana who bestows honor on others! Quickly consecrate as a king of demons
this greatly intelligent Vibhishana with that water, so that I am pleased."

Hearing Rama's words, Lakshmana consecrated Vibhishana as a king, as per the royal
instructions, amidst the leaders of monkeys.

Perceiving that instant graciousness in Rama, the monkeys cried, proclaiming
"excellent, excellent" about the high soled Rama.

Hanuman and Sugreeva asked Vibhishana as follows: " How can we cross the
imperturbable ocean, the habitation of Varuna, the god of water by all of us along with our army of
monkeys possessing a great splendor?"

"In what manner shall we along with the army swiftly cross the sea, the lord of
streams and rivers, and arrive at that strategy?"

Hearing their words, the right minded Vibhishana replied as follows: "It is apt if
prince Rama seeks ocean as his refuge"

"This immeasurable great ocean was excavated by Sagara*. Hence, this great ocean
will be inclined to do the act for Rama, his kinsman".

Hearing the aforesaid words of the learned demon Vibhishana, Sugreeva came to the
place where Rama and Lakshmana were there.

The long necked Sugreeva then started to tell the auspicious words of Vibhishana,
advising Rama to approach the ocean (to allow him a passage).

That advice found favor with Rama who by nature is of pious attitude. Then that
highly illustrious Rama replied to Sugreeva, the ruler of monkeys who was skillful in action and
who was accompanied by Lakshmana. Full of respect for Vibhishana's words, he told him as also his
brother Lakshmana smilingly as follows:

"O, Lakshmana! This idea of Vibhishana is agreeable to me. Sugreeva is a learned
person. You are ever wise in your thoughts. Both of you decide on the matter and inform whichever
is agreeable to you."

Hearing Rama's words, Sugreeva and Lakshmana both, valiant as they were, spoke with
proper courtesy, the following words: .

"O, Rama the tiger among men! Why not Vibhishana's words, which are soothing at this
time of crisis be agreeable also to us?"

"Without constructing a bridge across this fiery ocean, which is an abode of Lord
Varuna, even the celestials and demons along with Indra cannot reach the city of Lanka."

"Let the valiant Vibhishana's words be followed suitably. It is enough that we have
already wasted our time. Let the ocean be commanded to yield a passage for the army to reach the
city being ruled by Ravana."

Having been thus exhorted, Rama then sat on the shore of the ocean covered with
blades of Kusha grass, as the God of Fire ascends the altar.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Carefully hearing the words of Vibhishana, whose intellect was equal to that of
Brihaspati (god Of wisdom and eloquence) the high spirited Indrajit, the chief of army of demons
spoke as follows:

"O, youngest uncle! Pray, what? Your words are meaningless and very much
frightening. Even he who is not born in this race would neither speak such words nor do such a
thing (as you suggest)."

"In our race, this Vibhishana the youngest uncle is the only individual lacking in
strength, heroism, prowess, courage, valor and vital powers" W.w m.

"What after all are those princes who are mere human beings? They can be killed even
by one very ordinary demon among us. O, coward! Why are you frightening us? "

"At one time, the competent Devendra, the lord of three worlds, was indeed tossed
down on the floor by me. All the flocks of celestials were cast into fear and all of them fled to
different quarters."

"Airavata (Indra`s elephant), which was making noise discordantly, was hurled down
by me on the floor. I forcibly extracted its teeth and frightened the entire flock of
celestials."

"How can I, with great valor, who suppressed the arrogance of even the celestials
and who made the lives of even excellent of the demons miserable, not capable of conquering the two
princes who are ordinary human beings?"

Hearing those words of Indrajit, who was equal to Indra (god of celestials),
dangerous to be approached, and possessing great vital power, Vibhishana the excellent one among
bearers of weapons spoke then the following highly meaningful words:

"O, child! There is no stability of thought in you. Being a boy, you are still
immature in mind. That is why, many a meaningless word was prattled by you too, for only your
self-destruction."

"In the guise of a son, O, Indrajit, you are an enemy of Ravana putting on the mask
of a well wisher in that even hearing (from me) of his destruction at the hands of Rama, you are
blindly agreeing with him."

"You surely are fit to be killed. Nay, he too is fit to be killed, who brought you,
a reckless boy here today and ushered you foolishly in the proximity of counselors".

"O, Indrajit! You are a stupid, irresolute, without humility, rude natured; unwise;
evil person, inexperienced and highly evil minded. You are speaking in this manner because you are
an immature boy".

"Who can endure the arrows, discharged by Rama in battle right in front of the
enemy, which resemble Brahma's (creator's) staff in glory, which present a form similar to that of
God of Death and are equal to the Yama's staff?"

" O, king! Offering riches, precious stones, good jewellery, excellent clothes,
bright colored gems and the god-like Sita to Rama, let us live here, free from anguish."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Rama, who was well acquainted with portents, on seeing the portents around, embraced
Lakshmana and spoke as follows:

"O, Lakshmana! Acquiring this region endowed with cold water and woods abounding in
fruits, let us speedily divide this multitude of forces into battalions and drawing it up in battle
array, we shall stand attentive."

"I perceive an impending danger which will be terrific, causing destruction to the
world, and torture to the eminent heroes among bears monkeys and demons."

"Winds are blowing with dust and earth is trembling. Mountain- tops are quivering
and trees are falling down."

"Ferocious clouds resembling wild beasts were dirty colored and emit a terrific
roaring and let loose dreadful showers mingled with drops of blood."

"Evening twilight resembling red sandal wood is very much dreadful. From the blazing
sun, balls of fire fall."

"Wild animals and birds from all sides are roaring pitiably with melancholic sound,
facing towards the sun in great fear."

"The splendorous moon as though rising at the time of universal dissolution,
invested with a black and red halo is tormenting the mind this night."

"O, Lakshmana! A dark stain appears on the cloudless solar disc, which is
diminished, dreary, inauspicious and coppery."

"O, Lakshmana! Look! Stars enveloped in enormous dust, appear to announce a
dissolution of the world."

"Crows, eagles and vultures are flying low. Jackals too are howling very dreadful
and inauspicious sounds."

"Earth will become a quagmire of flesh and blood, covered with rocks spears and
swords hurled by monkeys and demons."

"Abounding with all the monkeys we shall attack the city ruled by Ravana, now itself
at a quick pace."

Rama the lord, the conqueror of enemies and a charming man thus speaking, wielded a
bow and sallied forth in front, facing towards Lanka.

All those excellent monkeys, together with Vibhishana and Sugriva making roaring
sounds surged forth for the destruction of the audacious enemies.

Rama on his part was pleased by the act and gestures of those very strong monkeys,
with their intention to gratify him.
undefined
undefined
undefined
Seeing his brother stretched on the ground, Nikumbha cast angry looks at Sugreeva, as 
it would burn him into ashes.
Then, Nikumbha of firm mind grasped his iron club, stupendous like the crest of Mount 
Mandara and which was bright, festooned with wreaths and provided with iron plates, measuring five digits 
in breadth.
Round it ran a broad strip of gold while diamonds and rubies studded it all over. Like 
the death-dealing rod of Yama, it seemed causing dismay to the monkeys and nerving the demons with courage.
Wielding that weapon, which in size resembled the flag-staff of Indra, Nikumbha of terrific 
prowess, roared with his mouth yawing wide.
On his chest shone a medal of gold. His arms were held by beautiful bracelets. Lustrous 
pendants depended from his ear. Resplendent garland enfolded his neck. With these ornaments and with 
his club, Nikumbha assumed the threatening semblance of a cloud, with lightning and thunder and shot 
with a vivid rainbow.
The strong Nikumbha, with his arms as strong as his club, hurled his club having sun-like 
splendour, on the breast of that mighty Hanuma.
The sky above appeared whirled around in the toss of Nikumbha's club, as though Alaka 
the City with the palaces of Gandharvas performed rapid revolutions and the moon and the stars and the 
planets joining the rotating race.
The hot tempered fire of Nikumbha, which had his club and ornaments for its flame and 
his fury as its fuel, became dangerous to be approached, like the fire rising at the time of dissolution 
of the world.
The demons and the monkeys too, out of fear, were unable even to make the slightest movement. 
The mighty Hanuma, on his part, stood alone among them, with his breast bared to the fury of the attack, 
in front of Nikumbha.
The strong Nikumbha, with his arms as strong as his club, hurled his club having sun-like 
splendour, on the breast of that mighty Hanuma.
The titanic club, which fell on the wide and rock-like chest of Hanuma, at once shattered 
into hundreds of fragments, like hundreds of meteors shattering into the sky.
That Hanuma, struck by that blow of the club, was unmoved like a mountain in an earthquake.
Thus struck by him, the mighty Hanuma the monkey-chief clenched his fist forcibly.
The greatly splendoured, powerful and swift Hanuma, with the violence of the wind-god, 
his father, lifting that fist, struck it against, Nikumbha's breast with force.
By the blow of that fist there, his armour got split up and red blood profusely oozed 
out, as a black cloud streaked suddenly with fierce lightning.
But, by that blow, Nikumbha was unmoved, recovered soon and grasped the unwieldy bulk 
of Hanuma.
Seeing the mighty Hanuma lifted off the ground in battle, loud roar of exultant joy rose 
from the ranks of demons.
Eventhough he was being carried off in that way by that demon, Hanuma the son of wind-god, 
struck him with his thunderbolt-like fist.
Freeing himself from Nikumbha, Hanuma the son of wind-god then threw him down on the 
ground and treated him with blows.
Throwing down Nikumbha by main force and with a supreme effort, Hanuma descended on him, 
leaped on his chest and pounded it mercilessly.
Then with both hands, he caught the enemy's neck, twisted it about and tore off his huge 
head, while Nikumbha was horribly roaring.
Then, while the roaring Nikumbha was killed in battle by Hanuma, there ensued an exceedingly 
terrific struggle between the enraged Rama and Makaraksha, son of Khara, a ruler of demons.
When it was clear that Nikumbha had expired, the monkeys shouted with glee, the quarters 
thundered with satisfaction, the earth rocked with joy, the heaven appeared to crumble and fear seized 
the army of demons.
undefined
undefined
undefined

On hearing of Nikumbha and Kumbha having been killed, Ravana was very much flared up
like fire.

Engulfed with both anger and sorrow, Ravana ordered the wide-eyed Makaraksha, the
son of Khara (as follows):

"I am commanding you! Accompanied by an army, go my son! Kill Rama, Lakshmana and
the monkeys."

Hearing Ravana's words, Makaraksha, the son of Khara, thinking himself as a hero,
was rejoiced and assured Ravana that he would do it certainly as commanded.

Having respectfully saluted, even by performing circumambulation, the mighty
Makaraksha, by the orders of Ravana, came forth from these shining palace of Ravana.

Makaraksha the son of Khara asked the commander of an army who was in the vicinity
to bring a chariot and the army swiftly.

Hearing his words, the army-commander of the demons brought the chariot and the army
to his proximity.

Walking clockwise round the chariot and ascending it, Makaraksha asked the
charioteer to drive forward the chariot quickly to the battle-field.

Then Makaraksha spoke the following words to those demons, "O demons! All of you
begin your fight before my presence."

"The mighty Ravana, the king of demons commanded me to kill both Rama and Lakshmana
in battle."

"Today, I will kill Rama, Lakshmana, Sugreeva the monkey and the other monkeys with
my excellent arrows, O demons!"

"By hurling the spears, I will destroy completely the huge army of monkeys who
arrived today to the battle-field, as the fire destroys the dry wood."

Hearing those words of Makaraksha, all those strong demons, wielding various kinds
of weapons, were steadfast to fight.

Those cruel demons, who can change their forms at will, who had protruding tusks,
had tawny coloured eyes, had their disheveled hair, creating terror with their colossal bodies,
then marched forward like roaring elephants, shaking the firmament and surrounded the huge-bodied
Makaraksha.

There arose a great tumult sounded, on all sides, of thousands of couches and
kettle-drums including leonine roars and clapping of arms.

The long whip then slipped down from the hands of Makaraksha's charioteer and the
flag-staff of that demon also suddenly fell down by the will of the province.

Those horses, yoked to his chariot, deprived of their diversified gait, were walking
with flurried feet and went timidly, with tears in their eyes.

At the time of marching of that dreadful and evil-minded Makaraksha, a harsh and
fearful dust-storm blew forth.

Though seeing those portents, all those highly valiant demons ignored them and set
out to the place, where both Rama and Lakshmana were there.

Saying thunderously, "I shall take the lead", those demons who resembled black
clouds, elephants and buffaloes in hue, who had been wounded pointedly more than once by maces and
swords in the battle-front and who were skilled in martial art, moved hither and thither in the
battle-field.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing that terrific roar, similar to the sound of Indra's thunderbolt, the monkeys
looking hither and thither, ran away in all directions.

Then, Hanuma the son of wind-god spoke (as follows) to all those monkeys, who were
running away widely apart, looking dejected, miserable and frightened.

"O, monkeys! Why are you running away, looking dejected and leaving your zeal to
fight? Where has your valour gone?"

"Come along closely behind me, while I am marching ahead in the battle. For the
valiant who are born in a good family, it is not indeed proper to shrink back from the battle."

Hearing the words of that wise Hanuma, the monkeys in a cheerful mood, took hold of
mountain-peaks and trees in a great fury.

The foremost of monkeys, while roaring, rushed towards the demons. They followed
him, by surrounding Hanuma on all sides, in that great battle.

That Hanuma, being surrounded by those monkey-chiefs on all sides, began to consume
that army of adversaries as a flaming fire.

That Hanuma, accompanied by his army of monkeys, brought about the destruction of
demons, as Yama the lord of death does at the time of universal dissolution.

Filled with inordinate grief and rage, that Hanuma the monkey-chief, threw a large
rock on Indrajit's chariot.

On seeing that rock rushing towards them, the obedient horses, yoked to that
chariot, carried the chariot off to a far-distance.

That rock employed in vain, without reaching that Indrajit and his charioteer
sitting in the chariot, split itself into fragments and penetrated the ground.

The demons were very much bruised by the falling fragments of the rock. That army of
demons was perturbed over the rock thus falling upon them.

Hundreds of monkeys with their colossal bodies, lifting up trees and mountain-peaks,
rushed roaring towards Indrajit.

Those monkeys of terrible prowess, threw trees and mountain-peaks towards Indrajit
in battle. While shooting a large deluge of trees and rocks, the monkeys caused destruction of
their enemies. They roared in various high tones.

Beaten forcibly with trees, by those highly terrible monkeys, those demons of
frightful appearance, rolled about restlessly in the battle-field.

On seeing his army tormented by the monkeys, that enraged Indrajit, taking hold of
his weapons, sallied forth, facing towards his enemies.

That Indrajit, of firm fortitude, accompanied by his army, by releasing a multitude
of arrows, killed a very many number of monkeys.

In the battle, Indrajit's soldiers too killed the monkeys with spikes tips of
missiles, swords, sharp-edged spears and concealed weapons similar to mallets.

The mighty Hanuma played a havoc among demons of terrible deeds, with Shala trees,
distinguished by excellent trunks and branches as with rocks.

Keeping the hostile army back, that Hanuma spoke to those monkeys as follows:
"Retreat! This army need not be conquered any more by us."

"That Seetha for whose sake we have fought so far, with a wish to do what is
pleasing to Rama, making a special effort to win, risking our lives has been killed."

"Informing Rama and even Sugreeva about this matter, we shall do that which both of
them are prepared to do in return."

Thus speaking and keeping back all the monkeys, Hanuma the chief of monkeys, with
absence of fear, along with his army, gradually turned back.

Seeing Hanuma with drawing to the place where Rama was, the evil-minded Indrajit
went to a sanctuary called Nikumbhila, seeking to pour oblations into the sacred fire.

Arriving at Nikumbhila, Indrajit poured oblations into the sacred fire. Thereupon,
while being propitiated by that demon on reaching sacrificial ground, the sacrificial fire then
blazed up on consuming the oblations of flesh and blood.

Swollen up when propitiated with oblations of blood, the highly intense fire, like
the evening sun, appeared wrapped in flames.

Then, Indrajit, well-versed with the technique of performance of rites for the
prosperity of the demons, poured oblations according to the scriptural precepts. Seeing this, those
demons, who knew what was prudent and evil in major battles, stood firm in big piles (by Indrajit's
side).
undefined
undefined
undefined
Hearing the words of Ravana, those demons who were strong, stupid and without moral conduct, 
all raising up their joined palms and spoke to Ravana the king of demons, without knowing the strengths 
of their enemy's side (as follows):
"Oh, king! Our army, equipped with iron bars, javelins, double-edged swords, darts and 
sharp-edged spears, is very great. Why are you getting worried?"
"After proceeding to Bhogavati city (the abode of Nagas in Patala one of the seven regions 
under the earth), the serpents there were defeated by you. Kubera (the bestower of riches) who resides 
on the peak of Mount Kailasa, surrounded by many yakshas (a class of demi-gods) surrendered to you after 
doing a great battle."
"Oh, Lord! By your rage, Kubera who was boasting himself for his friendship with Lord 
Shiva (the Supreme Lord) and said to be a guardian of the world possessing great strength, was defeated 
by you in battle."
"Throwing down a group of Yakshas, after causing a flutter among them and taking them 
in prison, this aerial car (Pushpak) was procured by you from Mount Kailasa."
"Oh, the best of ogres! By Maya, the lord of demons, Mandodari his daughter was given 
to you in marriage, due to fear from you and duly desiring your friendship."
Oh, mighty armed! Madhu Kumbhinasa's (your sister's) husband, another ruler of demons, 
who was proud of his valour and who was difficult to be defeated, was taken into your subjugation, your 
having won a battle against him."
"Oh, mighty armed! After moving down to rasatala (the penultimate subterranean region), 
the you conquered serpent-demons Vasukim Takshaka, Saukha and Jati were conquered by you and captivated 
as your subjects."
"Oh, annihilator of enemies, Commander of demons and the Lord! You after performing a 
battle for a year by you mighty demons who were beyond destruction, who were valiant and who obtained 
boons (for immortality) were defeated using your own strength in combat. Several fascinating tricks 
also were learnt from them."
"Oh, illustrious king! Varuna's sons, valiant strong and who were followed by an army 
having four limbs (viz. elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry) were defeated by you in a battle."
Oh, king! After entering a great ocean in the shape of Yama's realm, with a huge alligator 
in the form of death's rod of punishment, adorned with silk-cotton trees (bristling with thorns to be 
used a weapons), turbulent with a huge wave in the shape of noose of Kala (Time Spirit), with serpents 
in the form of Yama's servants and difficult to be conquered on account of mighty Jvara (Spirit presiding 
over fevers), and churning the sea in the form of Yama's forces, a great victory was obtained and death 
warded off by you. All the people there were delighted to see your good battle."
"The earth was filled, like with big trees, with many warriors who were strong with a 
courage equal to that Devendra (Lord of celestials).
"Oh, King! Rama was not equal to them in combat, by their valour excellence and energy. 
Those warriors, who were difficult to be overcome in battle, were overpowered and killed by you."
Oh, emperor! Why exertion to you? You remain here. Oh, emperor! This Indrajit alone can 
destroy the monkeys."
"Oh, emperor! After performing an excellent sacrifice to propitiate Mahesvara (the great 
lord shiva), a boon very rare to be obtained in the world, was acquired by him."
"Approaching that huge ocean of army of celestials, whose fish are lanes and spheres, 
whose guts thrown asunder as duck-weeds, whose turtles are the elephants, whose frogs are the teeming 
horses, infested with alligators in the form of (eleven) Rudras (gods of destruction) and (twelve) Adityas 
(sons of Aditi), with huge serpents in the form of (forty nine) Maruts (wind gods) and (eight) Vasus, 
having chariots horses and elephants for its volume of waters and the sandy elephants for its volume 
of waters and the sandy banks its infantry, Devendra (Lord of celestials) was captured by him and was 
impelled to come to Lanka (as a detenu).
"Oh, king! Having been released by the orders of your grand father Brahma, Devendra who 
killed demons called Shambara and Vrita and who was adored by all celestials, went back to heaven."
"Oh, emperor! You send that Indrajit alone, so that the army of monkeys together with 
Rama will be brought to an end."
"Oh, king! This unbefitting danger has come froma a man who is ordinary. It is not to 
be kept by you in mind, you will kill Rama."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Having seen the fearful and the terrible act in Lanka done by Hanuma, like Devendra
the powerful King of celestials, Ravana with his face descended a little with shame, spoke to the
demons as follows:

"By him, who was only a monkey, the irresistible City of Lanka was entered into and
was over-powered. Seetha the daughter of Janaka was also discovered by him.

The thousand-pillared building used as a sanctuary was assaulted by Hanuma. Our most
excellent demons were killed. The entire City of Lanka was made turbid.

May prosperity befall on you! What shall I do? What appropriate thing is to be done
next? Please speak that which is well-answering and that, if attempted becomes well-done.

"Oh, people of great strength! Wise-men say that victory is dependent on good
forethought. Verily for that reason, I desire a deliberation about Rama."

"There are three types of men in the world, namely the foremost the middle most and
the lowest. I am telling their inherent merits and defects."

"The wise call him as the foremost among men, who carries through the beginning of
any undertaking after consulting those who are wedded with welfare of others, or with ministers who
are efficient in conferring decisions or with friends having common interests or additionally with
relatives or who try to get a favour from Providence too."

"The wise men call that man as mediocre, who deliberates about an activity
solitarily, applies his mind on law and justice all by himself and performs works singly."

"He who does not determine the merits and demerits of an act clearly, having
recourse to Providence and neglects his duty by simply telling �I shall do it', he is the lowest
among men."

"In which manner these men are categorized always as good, bad or mediocre, so also
the resolution in thought is classified as good bad or mediocre."

"The wise say that resolution of thought is excellent, in which the thinkers, on a
view perceived by scriptures, obtain consensus and are satisfied with it."

"Only after deliberating several kinds of opinions, that decision of a matter
obtained finally by a consensus of the counselors, is called mediocre."

"That resolution is said to be worst in which several arguments are made, employing
one or the other divergent opinions and in which there is no advantage even after a consensus."

"For that reason, you, having excellent intellect, arrive at a well-thought out
rightful action. To me, this is earnestly to be done."

"Rama surrounded by thousands of courageous monkeys, is coming to the City of Lanka,
for the purpose of besieging us."

"Rama, by his be-fitting strength, can certainly cross the ocean easily, with his
brother along with his army and his companions."

"He may even get the ocean dried up. He may do any other thing by his valour. The
aforesaid act of enmity with monkeys having commenced in this way, advise me everything that is
good for the city and my army."
undefined
undefined
undefined

That Kumbhakarna of great prowess and the foremost, having full of intoxicating
drowsiness, marched along the king's highway, full of royal dignity.

Then, that Kumbhakarna, who was very difficult to be conquered, accompanied by
thousands of demons, sallied forth, covered with a shower of flowers from the houses (lining the
way).

He saw Ravana's abode, covered with golden grilled windows, spacious and looking
beautiful, like a shining sun.

Entering Ravana's palace, like the sun entering a mass of clouds, Kumbhakarna then
saw from of distance his brother seated on a throne, as Indra saw Brahma perched on his seat.

While going to his brother's palace, that Kumbhakarna, accompanied by troops of
demons, caused the earth to shake with his stamping strides.

Reaching his brother's house and entering the inner apartment, Kumbhakarna saw his
worried brother sitting in Pushpaka, a self-moving aerial car.

On seeing Kumbhakarna who arrived there, Ravana then quickly rose up from his seat,
delighted and brought him nearer to his side.

Then, the mighty Kumbhakarna having offered salutation to the feet of his brother
sitting on a sofa, asked him, "What is to be done?"

Rising up from his seat, Ravana embraced him. That Kumbhakarna, who was thus
embraced and made happy by his brother, occupied an auspicious, charming and excellent seat.

Resting on that seat, the mighty Kumbhakarna, with his blood-shot eyes in anger,
spoke to Ravana as follows:

"O king! For what purpose have I been woken up by you, with effort? Tell me from
whom is the danger for you here and who is to be killed."

Ravana, with his eyes rolling with annoyance, spoke to Kumbhakarna, his brother, who
was there with anger (as follows):

"O mighty Kumbhakarna! You slept for a long period. You, who were fast asleep, do
not know about the fear created by Rama in me."

"This Rama, the son of Dasaratha, a strong man along with Sugreeva, having crossed
the ocean, is cutting short our race."

"Alas! See! Coming happily by a bridge, the forests and groves have been covered
with an ocean full of monkeys."

"The monkeys killed very important demons in battle. I do not envisage, in any way,
the destroyable of monkeys on the battle-field. It seems the monkeys were not even defeated at any
time before, in a combat."

"O mighty Kumbhakarna! Such a danger has arisen. You have to help us now. Get them
destroyed now. You have been woken up solely for that purpose."

"Rescuing me, whose treasury has become completely diminished, you protect this city
of Lanka, where only the children and the aged are left over."

"O the great armed Kumbhakarna. For the sake of your brother, perform this act,
which is very difficult to do. O brother, the annihilator of enemies! In this way, I did not
request anyone ever before."

"I have a great respect and affection towards you. O the foremost of demons! For
several times, in battles between gods and demons, you conquered the celestials and demons, after
attacking them in the battle."

"O Kumbhakarna of terrible prowess! Therefore, show your entire prowess. There is
indeed no one, in the entire beings, who is equal to you in strength."

"O Kumbhakarna, delighting in war and feeling affection for relatives! Perform this
excellent act, which is dear and beneficial to me, as per your liking. Blow away the army of
adversaries by your vital power, as an autumnal cloud is blown away by a high-rising wind."
undefined
undefined
undefined

When Dasaratha returned, the Lord Indra, the destroyer of Paka the demon, was very
much pleased and spoke to Rama, who stood there with his oined palms.

"O Rama, the foremost among men! Your sight of us, should not go in vain. Therefore,
tell us whatever is desired by you."

Hearing the words of the great souled Indra the lord of celestials, after having
been pleased, Rama with the most placid mind spoke the following words with rejoice:

"O the foremst among the eloquent! O Indra! If you have affection in me, I shall
speak out my words. Make my words real."

"Let all the monkeys, who reached the abode of death, after displaying their
energyfor

"O the bestower of honour! I wish to see all those monkeys, who for my sake, were
removed from their sons and wives, be delighted at heart."

"They were all valiant, proving their energies and did not take their death into
account. They made their strenuous efforts and died. O Indra! Restore their lives to them."

"Those mokeys - who coutned death as nothing and who were fond of doing favour to me
- let them get re-united with their near and dear ones by your grace. I seek this boon of you."

"O bestower of honour! I wish to see the monkeys and bears, free from wounds and
pains, with augmented strength and valour."

"Wherever the aforesaid monkeys live, let there be rivers with crystal-clear water,
flowers, roots and fruits even in an off-season."

Hearing the words of that great-souled Rama, Indra the lord of celestials endowed as
he was with delight, again spoke the following words:

"O beloved Rama! This boon, which has been sought by you is hard to grant. No offer
has, however, been revised by me in the past. Therefore this will come to be."

"Let all those monkeys and bears along with long-tailed monkeys, who have been
killed in battle, by the demons and whose heads and arms have been severed, be alive and active
again."

"Without any ill-health andwounds and with boosted strength and valour, the monkeys
will srise again, as those fallen asleep would do at the end of their sleep."

"All of them, full of delight, will get re-united with their friends, relatives,
kinsmen and family members."

"O the wielder of a great bow! The trees will look colourful with flowers and fruits
even in the off-season. Rivers too will remain constantly with water."

Thereupon, all those monkey-warriors got up, as if from a sleep, with all their
limbs completely healed of wounds. All the monkeys felt surprised, saying to one another "What
miracle is this?"

Seeing Rama, whose wish has been fully realised, all the foremost of celestials,
with a great delight, spoke praisingly to Rama and Lakshmana:

"O monarch! Proceed to Ayodhya from here and disband the monkeys. Reassure this
illustrious and devoted Seetha."

"O destroyer of adversaries! See Bharata, your brother, who is practising
austerities through grief caused by separation from you, the great-souled Shatrughna and all your
mohters. Get yourself consecrated on the throne. Bring rejoice to the citizens, by going
there."

Thus speaking to Rama and Lakshmana, Idnra the thousand-eyed god of celestials,
having beenpleased, returned to heaven with other gods in their aerial cars, shining liek the
sun.

having respectfully saluted all those celestials, Rama along with Lakshmana his
brother, then instructed all the monkeys to take rest in their respective places.

Thereupon, that illustrious and mighty army of rejoiced troops, for its part, whichw
as protected by Lakshmana and Rama, and was blazing with splendour on all sides, shone brightly
like the might, illumined by the moon.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Impelled by force of Destiny and with his red-blood eyes through anger due to
infatuation, that Ravana spoke to his charioteer as follows:

"O evil-minded fellow! Despising me as though I were bereft of manliness, incapable,
deficient in prowess, cowardly, petty-minded, devoid of energy, bereft of brilliance, deserted of
conjuring tricks and abandoned by mystic missiles, you are acting as per your discretion!"

"Why have you carried away this chariot of mine, thus humiliating me in the presence
of my enemies and overlooking my will?"

"O vulgar fellow! You have destroyed my fame which was earned through a long period,
prowess, vital power and the trust of people today."

"While my adversary, having an illustrious prowess and making others delightful
through feats of his valour, stood looking on, myself, who has an ardent desire for fighting and
who was made contemptible by you!"

"O evil-minded fellow! In case you do not, by perversity, carry away this chariot at
any event, this expectation of mine that you stand corrupted by the enemy, will be a fact."

"This act, which has been done by you, is only befitting of enemies. This is indeed
not the work of a friend, who wishes me well."

"If you inhabited with me in Lanka for a long time and if you remember my merit,
drive back the chariot swiftly till my enemy does not withdraw."

Hearing those harsh words of the foolish Ravana, the friendly-minded charioteer
spoke the following conciliatory words of Ravana:

"I was neither frightened nor I was stupid. I was not bribed by the enemies, nor was
I a blunderer. I was not disloyal to you. I have not forgotten the benefits conferred by you."

"An act which was not to your taste was done by me as something conducive to your
interest, by wishing well of you, for protecting your honour and with mind affectionately disposed
towards you through attachment."

"O monarch! Like somebody who is petty-minded and unworthy, you ought not to hold
me, devoted as I am to your pleasure and good, quilty in this matter."

"O monarch! Like somebody who is petty-minded and unworthy, you ought not to hold
me, devoted as I am to your pleasure and good, guilty in this matter."

"I understand your exhaustion, due to your strenuous fighting in the great battle. I
am not reflecting on the inclination of your valour or on your superiority over your enemy."

"The horses of my chariot were broken down and were exhausted by drawing the
chariot. They became miserable and thoroughly fatigued, like the cows lashed by heavy rain."

"I am seeing inauspiciousness in all the portents, which appear to us in large
numbers and duly examined by me."

"(Propitious and unpropitious) time and place, (good and bad) omens, facial as also
the strength and weakness of the warrior occupying the chariot must be ascertained (by a
charioteer)."

"The eminences and depressions of the ground as well as the parts which are level
and rugged, the time appropriate for the combat and the visible weak points of the enemy must be
known (by a charioteer)."

"How to arrive and retreat, how to hold one's position and to recede all this must
be known by a charioteer, seated in the chariot."

"This action appropriate was taken by me in order to give rest to you and to these
horses of the chariot as also to relieve your terrible fatigue."

"O the valiant lord! This chariot was not removed by me arbitrarily. That which was
done by me was because I was overwhelmed with affection for my master."

"O annihilator of enemies! O hero! Give me a command! I will do that which you will
enjoin me to do, with due attention and with a mind which feels relieved of all that is due."

Satisfied with the explanation given by his charioteer and applauding him in many
ways, Ravana who was avaricious of fighting, spoke the following words:

"O charioteer! Take this chariot quickly towards Rama. Ravana does not turn back in
battle, without killing his enemies."

Thus speaking Ravna the lord of demons was pleased and then presented a beautiful
and excellent ornament for the hand to him. That charioteer, after hearing Ravana's instruction,s
drove the chariot back to the battle-field.

Impelled by Ravana's command, that charioteer thereupon quickly drove the horses
forward. Then, that chariot of Ravana stood within a moment, before Rama's chariot on the
battle-field.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the foregoing auspicious words of Brahma (the creator), the fire-god came
up, taking Seetha in his arms.

Shaking off that funeral pile and taking that Seetha, the daughter of Janaka in his
arms, the fire-god forthwith sprang up at once in a personified form.

Bearing in his arms the youthful Seetha, who was shining brightly as the rising sun,
was decked in ornaments of refined gold, attired in a red robe and wore dark curly hair, who was
further adorned with ornaments of flowers, which had not abraded (on her entering the fire and
coming out of it), who was absolutely beyond reproach and looked just the same (as she did while
entering the fire and coming out of it), who was absolutely beyond reproach and looked just the
same (as she did while entering the flames), the fire-god restored her to Rama.

Then, the fire-god, the witness of the whole world, spoke to Rama as follows "Here
is your Seetha. No sin exists in her."

"This auspicious lady, whose character has been good, has never been unfaithful to
you who are endowed with strength of character either by word or by mind or even by intellect or by
her glances."

"Separated from you, this miserable and helpless lady, was taken away by Ravana the
demon, who was arrogant of his valour, from a lonely hermitage."

"This Seetha, who was fixing her mind upon you ad looking on you as her final
attainment, was detained in the gynaecium and hidden there. She was guarded by rightful
female-demons with horrible intellect."

"Seetha, whose mind was directed towards you, ignored that demon even though allured
and frightened through various means."

"Take back Seetha, who is sinless, with a pure character. She should not be told
anything harsh. I hereby command you."

Rama, the excellent among the eloquent, whose mind was set on virtue, with a
pleasant mind to hear the aforesaid speech, reflected for a while, his eyes, entirely filed with
tears of joy.

Hearing those words, the courageous Rama of great prowess and the foremost of those
upholding the virtue, replied to the fire-god, the best of gods.

"Seetha certainly deserves this pure factory ordeal in the eyes of the people in as
much as this blessed woman had resided for a long time indeed in the gynaecium of Ravana.

"The world would chatter against me, saying that Rama, the son of Dasaratha, was
really foolish and that his mind was dominated by lust, if I accept Seetha without examining her
with regard to her chastity."

"I also know that Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, who ever revolves in my mind, is
undivided in her affection to me."

"Ravana could not violate this wide-eyed woman, protected as she was by her own
splendour, any more than an ocean would transgress its bounds."

"In order to convince the three worlds, I, whose refugee is truth, ignored Seetha
while she was entering the fire."

"The evil-minded Ravana was not able to lay his violent hands, even in thought, o
the unobtainable Seetha, who was blazing like a flaming tongue of fire."

"This auspicious woman could not give way to the sovereignty, existing in the
gynaecium of Ravana, in as much as Seetha is not different from me, even as sunlight is not
different from the sun."

"Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, is completely pure in her character, in all the
three worlds and can no longer be renounced by me, as a good name cannot be cast aside by a prudent
man."

The salutary advice of you all, the affectionate guardians of the world, who are
saying what is conducive to our good, must be certainly carried out by me."

Saying thus and getting reunited with her beloved Seetha, the victorious and highly
illustrious Rama, a scion of Raghu dynasty, who was endowed with a great strength and deserved
happiness and was being glorified by his exploits, performed by his own self, experienced joy.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing Ravana killed by the great-souled Rama, the female-demons were stricken with
grief and rushed out from their gynaecium.

Even though impeded now and then by their maid servants, they were rolling in the
dust of the streets, with their hair dishevelled, tormented as they were with grief like cows that
had lost their calf.

Issuing out of the northern gate along with demons and penetrating into the terrific
battle-field, searching for their husband, who had been killed and crying out, "Ah my lord! Ah my
husband!" they all ran hither and thither on the ground which was covered with headless trunks and
rendered muddy with blood."

Those women, who were overcome with grief about the death of their husband, having
their eyes filled with tears, loudly lamented like female-elephants who had lost the leader of
their herd.

Those women saw the gigantic Ravana, who was endowed with a great strength and
invested with a great splendour, lying killed on the ground, like a heap of black collyrium.

Suddenly seeing their husband lying in dust of the battle-field, those women fell
down on his limbs, like uprooted wild creepers.

A woman wept, embracing him out of great regard, another woman clinging to his feet
and another, catching hold of his neck.

A woman rolled over the ground, with her arms thrown up. On seeing the face of her
deceased husband, another woman fell into a swoon.

Keeping Ravana's head in her lap, a woman, looking at his face, wept moistening that
face with her tears, as dew drops moisten a lotus-flower.

"That Ravana, by whom Indra was thrown into fear, Yama was struck with terror, by
whom Kubera the king was deprived of Pushpaka the aerial car, and by whom fear was caused on the
battle-field in the Gandharva the celestial musicians, in the sages and the great-souled gods, lies
killed in the battle-field."

"This danger has come from a mortal to him, who did not conceive any fear from the
demons or the gods or even the serpents for that matter!"

"Here lies killed in battle, by a pedestrian man coming from Ayodhya, that Ravana,
who was incapable of being killed by gods and even so by devils and demons too."

"He who could not be killed by gods, Yakshas and demons alike, could be killed by a
mortal like one devoid of strength."

Thus uttering, those women of Ravana, wailing as aforesaid, burst into tears. They
once more and repeatedly lamented, stricken, as they were, with grief (as follows):

"For your own death, Seetha was borne away by you, who did not listen to your near
and dear ones, who always offered friendly counsel to you. The demons were struck down. Here, stand
we (your consorts) as well as your own self, struck down now."

"Though tendering salutary advice to you, Vibhishana your beloved brother, was
harshly scolded through ignorance by you, who sought your own destruction."

"If you had restored Seetha a princess of Mithila to Rama, this appallingly terrific
disaster, which has robbed us of every root, would not have befallen us."

"If you had restored Seetha to Rama, Vibhishana your brother would have had his
desire fulfilled. Rama would have been in the company of our allies. All of us would have been
spared the curse of widowhood and our enemies would not have realized their ambition."

"By you, however, who forcefully captivated Seetha cruelly, the demons, we (your
consorts) and your own self all the three have been destroyed all at once."

"O the excellent demon! Your act of following your own free will, may not be the
reason for your destruction, either for, all is being run by a divine power, struck and ruined by
the divine power."

"This destruction of the monkeys, your demons as also yourself, in the battle, has
happened at the juncture of the Providence (alone), O the great armed!"

"The course of destiny, when ready to bear fruit, cannot be diverted either by
money, or by wish, or by valour or even by command in this world."

Those consorts of Ravana, depressed as they were and afflicted with grief, with
their eyes full of tears, thus lamented like female ospreys.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing that Seetha, who stood at his vicinity bowing low, Rama began to tell his
feeling hidden in his heart (as follows):

"You are won back by me, after conquering the enemy in the battle-field, my dear
lady! That which is to be done through human effort, has been accomplished by me."

"I have come to the end of my indignation and my outrage has been completely
requited as also the contempt against the enemy have been wiped out, all at once, by me."

"Now, my manly strength has been seen by all. Today, my toil has borne fruit. Now, I
have fulfilled my promise. Today, I am the master of myself."

"The wrong done to you, when you were deserted from me, in that you were taken away
by a fickle-minded demon, which was ordained by the destiny, has been corrected by me as a human
being."

"What is the use of a prowess, however great, of that weak-minded man who does not
wipe out, by his energy, the insult fallen to his lot?"

"The praise-worthy act of Hanuma in the form of crossing of the ocean and the
destroying of Lanka, has borne fruit today."

"The endeavour of Sugreeva, who exhibited his prowess on the battle-field with his
army and tendered a good advice, is fruitful today."

"Furthermore, the exertion of Vibhishana, who after deserting his brother who was
void of good qualities, sought my presence, is fruitful today.

Hearing those words spoken thus by Rama, Seetha with her eyes wide open like those
of a female-deer, was bathed in tears.

The heart of King Rama, as he saw Seetha, (the beloved of his heart) near him, was
torn for fear of public scandal.

In the midst of monkeys and demons, Rama spoke (as follows) to Seetha, whose eyes
resembled the petals of a lotus, who wore dark curly hair and was endowed with fine hips.

"I, wanting for an honour, have done this particular act, which ought to be done by
a man, in killing Ravana and thus wiping away the insult meted out to me."

"You have been won by me, whose mind stands purified by asceticism as the southern
quarter, which was difficult to be approached by the world of mortals, was conquered by the Sage
Agastya."

"Let it be known to you that this endeavor in the shape of war, which has been
successful carried through, due to the strength of my friends was not undertaken for your sake. Let
there be prosperity to you! This was done by me in order to keep up my good conduct and to wipe off
the evil-speaking from all sides as well as the insinuation on my own illustrious dynasty."

"You, with a suspicion arisen on your character, standing in front of me, are
extremely disagreeable to me, even as a light to one, who is suffering from a poor eye-sight."

"O Seetha! That is why, I am permitting you now. Go wherever you like. All these ten
directions are open to you, my dear lady! There is no work to be done to me, by you."

"Which noble man, born in an illustrious race, will take back a woman who lived in
another's abode, with an eager mind?"

"While mentioning greatly about my lineage, how can I accept again, you who were
harassed in Ravana's lap (while being borne away by him) and who were seen (by him) with evil
looks?"

"You were won by me with that end in view (viz. the retrieval of my lost honour).
The honour has been restored by me. For me, there is no intense attachment in you. You may go
wherever you like from here."

"O gracious lady! Therefore, this has been spoken by me today, with a resolved mind.
Set you mind on Lakshmana or Bharata, as per your ease."

"O Seetha! Otherwise, set your mind either on Shatrughna or on Sugreeva or on
Vibhishana the demon; or according to your own comfort."

"Seeing you, who are endowed with a beautiful form and attractive to the sense,
detained for long in his abode, Ravana could not have endured your separation."

Hearing that unpalatable speech of her beloved husband, Seetha who used to hear
pleasing words alone, was very much trembled for long, like a creeper attacked by the proboscis of
an elephant and thereupon shed tears.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Indrajit, the son of Ravana having returned to Lanka, his purpose accomplished, the
leading monkeys surrounded Rama in order to watch over him.

Hanuman, Angada, Nila, Sushena, Kumuda, Nala, Gaja, Gavaksha, Panasa, Sanuprastha
and the mighty Jambavan with Sunda, Rambha, Shatabali and Prithu all these monkeys, armed with
trees, reorganized their ranks, stood alert, surveyed the quarters of the sky up and down and on
every side and, even if a grass stirred, they exclaimed, "It is a demon!"

Ravana, meanwhile, full of joy, dismissed his son Indrajit and thereafter summoned
the female demons who guarded Seetha.

Following his orders, the female-demons along with Trijata appeared before him.
Then, the rejoiced Ravana said to them as follows:

"Tell Seetha that Rama and Lakshmana have been killed by Indrajit. Take her in
Pushpaka the aeroplane and show her Rama and Lakshman who were killed in battle."

"Her husband, the one depending on whom rendered her so proud that she refused to be
united with me, lies there killed with his brother in the battle-front."

"From now on, free from anxiety, grief and expectation of reunion, Seetha the
princess of Mithila kingdom, adorned in all her jewels, will submit herself to me."

"Beholding Rama and Lakshmana fallen under the sway of death on the battle-field
today, finding no other haven and hoping for nothing else, the large-eyed Seetha will voluntarily
seek refuge with me!"

Hearing these words of the cruel Ravana, they all replied, "Be it so" and went to
where the Pushpaka chariot was.

Thereafter, the female-demons brought the aerial car, Pushpaka as per the
instructions of Ravana and carried it nearer to Seetha who was staying in Ashoka-grove.

The female-demons brought Seetha who was afflicted with grief for her husband and
made her to ascend Pushpaka-plane.

The female-demons along with Trijata made Seetha to ascend Pushpaka-plane and
proceeded to show her Rama and Lakshmana.

Ravana the king of demons, thrilled with rapture, caused Lanka to be garlanded with
flags and banners and arranged a proclamation to be made in Lanka announcing that Rama and
Lakshmana had been slain by Indrajit in battle.

Seetha along with Trijata, transported by that plane, saw all the monkey-troops who
had been slain.

Seetha saw the demons who were delighted at heart and monkeys disturbed with grief,
standing round Rama and Lakshmana.

Then, Seetha beheld those two warriors Rama and Lakshmana lying unconscious on the
ground on a bed of arrows, their limbs pierced with arrows, riddled with weapons, their armour
shattered, their bows cast aside at a distance and their entire body transfixed by darts.

On seeing those two brothers, who were filled with valour, having lotus-eyes, the
excellent of men, lying streteched on a bed of arrows there in that wretched plight like the two
sons of the fire-god (Shkha and Vishakha) lying on a bed of reeds, Seetha wailed piteously,
stricken as she was with a great agony.

The dark-eyed Seetha the daughter of Janaka with her faultless limbs, beholding her
lord and Lakshmana lying in the dust, burst into sobs.

Witnessing those brothers, the prominent sons of god, Seetha afflicted with tearful
sorrow, believing their death, spoke with grief the following words.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Lakshmana, endowed with auspicious bodily marks, whose limbs were drenched in blood,
felt rejoiced on having killed Indrajit in combat.

Having offered salutation to Jambavan, Hanuma and all those monkeys, that valiant
Lakshmana of great brilliance then quickly came from there to the place where Sugreeva and Rama
were there, by leaning himself upon vibhishana and Hanuma.

Having offered his salutation and approached Rama, Lakshmana stood beside his
brother, even as Lord Vamana (the younger brother of Indra) would stand beside Indra the lord of
celestials.

Then, the valiant Lakshmana, arriving at the great-souled Rama, told him in a
murmering tone (as he was feeling tiresome) about the terrific destroyal of Indrajit.

Then, the rejoiced Vibhishana informed (in a clear tone) to Rama that Indrajit's
head had been chopped off by the great-souled Lakshaman.

Just on hearing the news about the killing of Indrajit by Lakshmana, Rama of great
prowess obtained immesurable joy and spoke the following words

"O Lakshmana! Well done! I feel gratified. An ardous act has been done. Consider it
as our victory, through the destroyal of Indrajit.

Smelling the head of that Lakshmana, who had augmented his fame and yet who was
feeling abashed (to hear himself being praised), forcibly drawing him to his lap and placing that
Lakshmana his younger brother in his lap with affection, wounded as he was, that valiant Rama,
having embraced him, tenderly gazed upon him affectionately again and again.

Smelling once more the head of that Lakshmana, who was feeling tormented by the
arrows that had penetrted into his body, who had been wounded, who was breathing heard, who was
endowed with auspicious characterestics, was afflicted with agony and was feeling paine dat the
time of respiration, and hurriedly stroking him as well as restoring confidence in him, Rama the
foremost among men spoke the following words:

"An extremely noble act was performed by you, a doer of difficult things. Now, that
his son having been killed, I account Ravana to have been killed in battle."

"As that evil-minded enenmy has been killed, I become victorious. O valiant
Lakshmana! Fortunately, you indeed severed the right hand of the cruel Ravana. Indrajit is indeed
the support for that Ravana. Vibhishana and Hanuma too performed a great feat in the great
battle."

"In the course of three days and nights, the valiant Indrajit was felled down
somehow. Now, I have been made free of enemies. Hearing of his son having been struck down, Ravana
will indeed come forth with a great and powerful battle-array."

"By encircling that Ravana, who is difficult to be conquered, with a great army, I
will kill him, who is coming forth with a feeling of distress for the death of his son."

"O Lakshmana! As that Indrajit has been killed in battle by you, who are my
protector, neither Seetha nor this entire earth is hard to attain."

Having thus consoled Lakshmana and having embraced him, that Rama who was born in
Raghu-dynansty, was duly delighted and by calling Sushena, spoke to him the following words:

"O highly intelligent one! You attend upon this wounded Lakshmana, who is fond of
frinds, so that he will become perfectly well in health."

Let Lakshmana along with Vibhishana be quickly made free from pain caused by the
arrows that have penetrated into their body. Let all others too among the gallant bear and
monkey-warriors fighting with trees who have fought on the battle-field here and stand pierced with
arrows and owunded, be healed in the same way with great care."

As commanded by Rama, the great-souled Sushena, the monkey-cheif gave an excellent
medicine through nose to Lakshmana.

Inhaling the odour of that herb, Lakshmana became healed of the arrow-wounds, free
from pains and his wounds got completely cured.

As per the order of Rama, Sushena then treated his companions like Vibhishana and
others including all the monkey-chiefs.

Then, with his arrow-wounds healed, his fatigue gone and his feverishness cured
within a moment, Lakshmana having restored his original disposition, felt joyful there.

Then, on seeing Lakshmana standing up with sound health, Rama, Sugreeva, Vibhishana
and the valiant Jambavan along with the army were rejoiced for a long time.

That great-souled Rama apllauded the ardous feat of Lakshmana. Hearing of Indrajit
having been kille din battle, Sugreeva became delighted.
undefined
undefined
undefined

After completion of fourteen years of his exile and on the fifth day of the bright
half of the lunar month of Ashvayuja (roughly corresponding to the month of September), Rama, who
was disciplined even now, reaching the hermitage of the sage Bharadwaja, offered his salutation to
the sage.

Having offered his obeisance to Bharadwaja, who was rich in asceticism, Rama
enquired (of him): "Have you heard, O venerable one, of Ayodhya City having an abundance of food
and free from disease? Is that Bharata attentive in his rule? I hope my mothers are still
alive."

Hearing the words of Rama, Bharadwaja the great sage, quite rejoiced as he was,
smilingly replied to Rama (as follows):

"Bharata, with his mud-smeared limbs 9throwing the burden and blame ie. mud and with
matted locks, as also placing your wooden-sandals before him, is looking forward for your arrival.
All are safe at your home and in the city."

"O Rama, the victorious in battles! Formerly, on seeing you penetrating deeply into
the great forest on foot, with the sole intention of practicing virtue, clad in pieces of bark,
going away from sovereignty, deprived of all enjoyments, like an immortal fallen from heaven,
having renounced all your possession, with your spouse (Seetha) as the third (of your party besides
Lakshmana and yourself), resolved in carrying out the behest of your father and intent on
implementing the pledge given (by your father) to Kaikeyi and living on wild roots and fruits, pity
arose in me earlier."

"But now, a great delight occurred to me, on seeing you, having fulfilled your
purpose, that you have conquered your enemies and are accompanied by your host of friends and
relatives."

"That joy and sorrow experienced by you in abundance while residing in
Janasthana-forest in completely known to me, O Rama!"

"While you were busy in protecting all the ascetics who prayed you for safeguarding
the interests of Brahmanas, this irreproachable wife of yours was taken away by Ravana."

"O Rama, devoted to virtue! Even the appearance of Mareecha, the abduction of Seetha
by Ravana, the sight of Kabandha, your arrival at the Pampa lake, your alliance with Sugreeva, how
Vali was killed by you, the search-operation for Seetha, the exploit of Hanuma, the tracing of
Seetha, how the bridge, Nalasetu was constructed (over the sea), how the City of Lanka was set fire
by the rejoiced monkey-chiefs, how that Ravana who was the thorn in the side of gods and how was
arrogant of his might, was killed in battle, with his sons kinsfolk and his ministers as the gods
happened, how a boon was conferred by them on you- all this is known to me by virtue of my
asceticism. My disciples, who were accustomed to report to me the news, used to go to Ayodhya-City
from here."

"The friends, the riches and the grains are highly honoured in this world. Mother
and mother-land are far superior to even the heaven."

Bowing to the aforesaid statement of the sage with his head bent low, highly pleased
as he was and saying, "By all means" the glorious prince (Rama) asked of him the following
boon:

"O venerable sir! Let all the trees on the way, even as I fly to Ayodhya, bear fruit
even in the off-season and flow with honey. Let abundant fruits of various kinds, emitting the
fragrance of nectar, appear on them."

Once the consent of the sage was given in the words "be it so", the trees there grew
to be closely like the heavenly trees.

Then, for an extent of three Yojanas (twenty four miles) on all sides, in the
direction of their travel, the trees that no longer bore fruit, were laden with fruit and those
which had ceased to blossom looked charming with blossom. The withered trees were fully clothed
with foliage and further began to flow with honey.

Highly rejoiced who had conquered the heaven, those monkey-chiefs thereupon consumed
at will, thousands of many of those wonderful fruits.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Ravana, goaded by death, spoke the following harsh words to Vibhishana, who was very
stable and who had spoken wholesome words:

"One can stay together with an enemy or even with a furious snake, but one cannot
stay together with an adversary yet avowing himself as a friend"

"O, demon! I know the conduct of kinsmen in all the worlds. These kinsmen always are
rejoiced at the calamities of their kinsmen"

"O, demon! The kinsmen indeed insult and even humiliate their kinsman, who is an
effective leader, a person of education and right conduct and a valiant man."

"The horrible kinsmen with their concealed thoughts and treacherous minds, terrific
ones as they are, always rejoice each other in adversities."

"Previously in a forest called Padmavana, some maxims were spoken by elephants,
which saw men with nooses in hand. Hear and I shall tell them."

"For us, fire or weapons or nooses are not begetting fear. The terrific kinsmen,
incited by selfishness are begetting fear to us."

"These kinsmen will inform the strategy to our enemies to seize us. There is no
doubt about this. Out of all fears, the fear of kinsmen is very much troublesome for us. It is a
well known thing."

"There is wealth in cows. There is fear for kinsmen. There is fickleness in women.
There is austerity in Brahmins."

"O, gentleman! Hence, it is not of liking to you that the people are venerating me,
that I obtained riches and that I am sitting tight in the heads of enemies".

"As drops of water fallen on lotus leaves do not get clung to those leaves, so also
a friendship does not cling to vulgar ones."

"As rainy clouds in autumn, even though thundering, cannot get the earth saturated
with water, so also friendship does not have tenderness of heart in vulgar people."

"As a honey bee, even though getting nectar from a flower, does not stick on to that
flower due to its eager desire for more, you also belong to that category as friendship does not
stick on to vulgar people."

"As even though trying to drink nectar from a flower of grass, a honey bee cannot
get it, so also friendship cannot be extracted from vulgar persons."

"How an elephant abuses its body by helping itself with dust after taking bath
earlier with its trunk, friendship gets an abuse in vulgar persons in the same manner."

"O, demon, walking about by night! If any other person utters these words in this
manner, he will be ceasing to exit at this moment. O, destroyer of race! A curse upon you!"

Hearing those harsh words from Ravana, Vibhishana who advocates justice, wielding a
mace in his hand, soared high into the sky, along with four other demons.

Then, the illustrious Vibhishana who became angry also spoke these words to king
Ravana, his brother after moving into the sky.

"O, king! You are a brother to me. You utter whatever you like. Elder brother is
like a father. Even if he is not staying in a right path, he is to be respected. But I cannot
forbear these harsh words from you."

"Those who have an ill composed mind and who get conceded to the occasion do not
assimilate the words of prudence, spoken by a well wisher."

"O, king! Men who forever speak pleasing words are easy to be obtained. But one who
speaks of useful but unpleasing words as also the one who listens to them, are rare to be
obtained"

"I could not ignore you, being destroyed by the noose of Yama (god of death); tied
around you and which snatches away all beings, as none can ignore a burning house."

"I do not wish to see you, being killed by Rama with his sharp arrows, adorned with
gold and each resembling like a blazing fire."

"Persons who are valiant, strong and skilled in weaponry, when time comes, sink down
(ruin) as a dam constructed with sand sinks down."

"As an elder brother, bear the words spoken by me, who desire your welfare. Guard
this city and yourself along with demons, by all means. Let all be well with you. I am departing.
Be a happy person without me."

"O, Ravana the ranger of the night! My words are not relishing to you, who are being
restrained by me duly desiring your welfare. Persons whose duration of life is to end, do not
accept the salutary words spoken by their well wishers"
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing that the great-souled Rama killed Kumbhakarna, the demons reported the matter
to Ravana, the king of demons (as follows):

"O king! That Kumbhakarna, looking like Yama the god of death, driving away the army
of monkeys and devouring some monkeys, met with death, the time's act."

"Showing his prowess for a moment, Kumbhakarna your brother, was extinguished by the
fiery energy of Rama. Injured by Rama's arrows, Kumbhakarna who was looking like a mountain became
an ugly mass, with his body discharging blood, as his nose and ears were cut off, resembling a tree
scorched by a forest-fire, with his trunk half-submerged in a terribly looking sea and obstructing
the main gate of Lanka."

Hearing that the mighty Kumbhakarna was killed in battle, Ravana was tormented with
grief and fell down, fainted.

Hearing that his paternal uncle was killed; Devantaka, Narantaka, Trishira and
Atikaya were afflicted with sorrow and wept.

Hearing that Kumbhakarna, their brother was killed by Rama, who was unwary in his
actions, Mahodara and Mahaparshva (step-brothers of Kumbhakarna) were overcome with grief.

Then, recovering his consciousness with difficulty, distressed as he was for the
killing of Kumbhakarna and perplexed in mind, Ravana the foremost of demons, lamented (as
follows):

"Alas! O hero, destroying the pride of enemies! O mighty Kumbhakarna! Leaving me
behind, you have gone by divine will to the abode of Yama the lord of death."

"O mighty Kumbhakarna! Where are you going alone, leaving me behind, after having
tormented the army of enemies and without taking away the thorn of grief from relatives and
me."

"Indeed I shall no longer live now, that this right hand of mine, taking refuge on
when I had no fear of celestials and ogres, has fallen down."

"How such a hero, who destroyed the pride of celestials and demons, as also who was
an image of fire that was to destroy the world, was killed by Rama today in battle?"

"Having been afflicted by Rama's arrows, how are you, whom not even a clash of a
thunder-bolt ever caused any fall, falling now insensibly on the earth's surface?"

"Seeing you killed in battle, these troops of celestials and sages, standing in the
sky, are shouting with rejoice."

"It is doubly sure that the monkeys, having achieved their purpose, will be rejoiced
and now itself will ascend the inaccessible door-ways of Lanka here from all sides."

"I have nothing to do with a kingdom and what shall I do with Seetha? I have no
intention to live, bereft of Kumbhakarna."

"If I cannot kill Rama, who killed my brother, in battle, I would indeed prefer
death, but in no case this useless life which has no meaning."

"Now itself, I will go to that place, where my younger brother is there. I do not
wish to live even for a moment, after abandoning my brothers."

"Seeing me, who did harm to them in the past, the celestials will indeed mock me. O
Kumbhakarna! Now that you are dead, how can I conquer Indra the lord of celestials?"

"Those words of that great-souled Vibhishana, which I did not accept due to
ignorance, have come true."

"Ever since this cruel end of Kumbhakarna and Prahasta has happened, I am feeling
shameful."

"Since that venerable Vibhishana, my pious brother was banished by me, this bitter
fruit of that painful deed has come to me."

Having thus lamented very much piteously in various ways on coming to know that
Kumbhakarna, his younger brother and the enemy of Indra having been killed, Ravana the ten-headed
demon, whose inner feelings were agitated, even sank down, extremely disturbed.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing Atikaya having been killed in the hands of the great-souled Lakshmana,
Ravana was worried and spoke as follows:

"Dhumraksha, who was greatly impatient Akampana who was excellent among all wielders
of weapons, Prahasta and Kumbhakarna were killed by Rama, who was unwearied in battle. The mighty
and valiant demons longing for battle, who conquer the adversaries, who was never defeated in
battle by the enemies they along with their enemies were killed. Many other mighty warriors.

"That day, Indrajit, my son, whose strength and prowess are renowned, bound both
Rama and Lakshmana, the brothers with terrific arrows, on which boons had been conferred."

"That terrific bind of arrow cannot be released by any celestial or a mighty demon
or by Yakshas the supernatural beings or Gandharvas the celestial musicians or Pannagas the
serpent-demons. Rama and Lakshmana, the two brothers were released from that tie of arrows either
by their power or by their sorcery or by their marvel I do not know that."

"All of those valiant demon-warriors set out for battle, at my command, were killed
by those exceptionally mighty monkeys."

"I do not find any demon, who can destroy the valiant Rama along with Lakshmana,
Sugreeva and Vibhishana accompanied by their army in battle now."

"By Rama's valour, the demons were destroyed. Alas! How great is Rama's strength!
How great is the power of his arrow!"

"Some regiments of the army have to protect this City and even Ashoka garden where
Seetha is being guarded, vigilantly on all sides."

"We should know the locations of army-regiments and also the places where persons
are exiting and entering at all times, again and again.

"O demons! Stay on all sides with your respective armies. The various positioning of
those monkeys are to be watched."

"Indifference should not be shown to monkeys in any way at any time, either at
evening or at midnight or at dawn. You have watch whether the army of adversaries is fervently
active or advancing or staying where it was."

Hearing those words of Ravana, all the mighty demons then precisely carried it out
forthwith in its totality.

Having thus instructed all of them, Ravana the king of demons, suffering from
prickly sorrow and depression, penetrated deeply into his palace.

Blazed as he was with a fire of anger, Ravana the mighty lord of demons, then
remained broading about the loss of his son (Atikaya) and also sighing again and again.
undefined
undefined
undefined
Rama, who was followed by Lakshmana, having made up his mind to ascend Mount Suvela, 
spoke in a gentle and prime voice to Sugreeva and to Vibhishana who was the knower of what is right, 
a demon devoted to him who was experienced in counsel and a knower of prescribed rules (as follows):
"We shall ascend up on high this Suvela mountain, shining well with hundreds of minerals. 
All of us will stay on this mountain for this night."
"We shall see Lanka the abode of that demon, Ravana the evil-minded by whom my wife was 
taken away for the sake of his own death, by whom virtue was not understood, good character was not 
known and noble lineage was not seen and by whom that contemptible act was done with an inferior demoniacal 
mind."
"My anger is increased on hearing the name of that demon. Because of the offence committed 
by him, I shall see that all these demons are destroyed."
"Falling into that power of trap of death, one does an evil act. Because of the offence 
committed by him the vilest, his lineage is destroyed."
Rama, thus thinking of Ravana in anger, approached and ascended the mountain of Suvela 
with its conspicuous summits.
Lakshamana too who took delight in his own valour and steadfastness, keeping ready his 
mighty bow with arrows, followed behind Rama Sugreeva along with his ministers and Vibhishana ascended 
the mountain, by following him.
Hanuman, Angada, Nila, Mainda, Dvivida, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sharabha, Gandhamadana, 
Panasa, Kumuda, Hara, Rambha the chief of the troop, Jambavan, sushena, the greatly wise Rishabha, Durmukha 
of great splendour, Shatabali the monkey and other hundreds of monkeys which are fast-moving, which 
can wander easily on mountains with a speed akin to that of wind, ascended that Suvela mountain which 
Rama ascended.
Having ascended the mountain from all sides within no long time, they saw at its apex, 
the city of Lanka which appeared as though it was hanging in the sky.
The chiefs of monkey-troops saw that beautiful City of Lanka, furnished with excellent 
gates, enriched with exquisitc ramparts and pervaded all over with demons.
Those excellent monkeys saw another rampart formed out of the black demons so standing 
together scribble on that existing exquisite rampart.
Seeing the demons who were craving for war, all those monkeys made various types of noises, 
while Rama was witnessing the scene.
Then, the sun reddened with evening-twillight went down and the night shining with full 
moon arrived.
Thereafter, Rama along with Lakshmana as well as Sugreeva the Lord of monkeys together 
with troops and captions of troops, duly greeted welcomingly and treated hospitably by Vibhishana, halted 
happily on the mountain resort of Suvela.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Having seen the destruction of Ravana, those gods, celestial musicians and demons,
while chatting about the auspicious narrative, went away in their respective aerial cars.

Chatting themselves about the awful destruction of Ravana, the terrific prowess of
Rama, the admirable combat of the monkeys, the counsel tendered by Sugreeva, the affection and
valour of Lakshmana; the son of Sumitra; the loyaltyof Seetha to her husband and about the strength
of Hanuma, the illustrious celestials and others rejoicingly returned as they had come.

Taking leave of the celestial chariot, which had been given by Indra the lord of
celestials and which shone like fire, the mighty armed Rama respectfully saluted Matali.

As assented by Rama, Matali Indra's charioteer, mounting that celestial chariot,
ascended to the heaven itself.

When Matali ascended to heaven along with his chariot, Rama, the foremost one among
the chariot-warriors was highly rejoiced and embraced Sugreeva.

Having embraced Sugreeva greeted by Lakshmana and having been honoured by the
monkey-troops. Rama came to the camp where the army had been stationed.

Then, Rama spoke (as follows) to Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, who was endowed with
strength and having auspicious marks, who stayed nearby.

"O the benevolent Lakshmana! Consecrate on the throne of Lanka, this Vibhishana to
whom everyone is attached, a loyal person as he is and the one who has formerly done a service to
us."

"O gentle one! This s my paramount desire that I should see this Vibhishana, the
brother of Ravana being consecrated for throne in Lanka."

Hearing the words of the great soled Rama, Lakshmana replied, 'so it be' and
rejoicingly procured a golden pot.

That mighty Lakshmana, then placing that pot in the hands of the monkey-chiefs,
instructed them, who were as swift as thought, to bring sea-water.

Thereupon, those excellent monkeys, with the swiftness of thought, moving very
quickly from that place, returned, having obtained the water from the sea.

Thereupon, Lakshmana together with his friends, taking one pot and making Vibhishana
to sit on the throne, sprinkled him with sea-water from that pot in accordance with the rule
prescribed in Vedic scriptures, while the demons were witnessing the ceremony, to make him the king
for Lanka, as directed by Rama.

Then, all the demons as well as the monkeys consecrated Vibhishana. Having gained
extra ordinary delight, they indeed eulogized Rama.

Seeing Vibhishana the lord of demons consecrated for the throne of Lanka, his four
counsellors who were always together with him and such of those demons who were devoted to him,
were rejoiced.

Rama together with Lakshmana were greatly delighted. That Vibhishana, having gained
that great kingdom bestowed on him by Rama, was also greatly delighted.

After consoling his people, Vibhishana then sought to presence of Rama. Now, the
demons who were residing in the city were quite delighted and brought to him (by way of presents)
curds, unbroken grains of rice, sweets shaped like balls, parched grains of unhusked rice and
flowers too.

Accepting them, the valiant and unconquerable Vibhishana happily offered all those
auspicious objects to Rama and Lakshmana.

Seeing Vibhishana, who had accomplished his act and increased his resources, Rama
accepted it all, with a sole desire to show gratefulness to him.

Thereupon, Rama spoke the following words to the valiant Hanuma the monkey who was
equal in size to a mountain and who was standing in humility, with his hands joined in
salutation.

"O the benevolent one! Taking permission from this Vibhishana, the great king and
entering into the City of Lanka, inform about our welfare to Seetha."

"O Hanuma, the proficient one in speech! Inform Seetha that myself together with
Lakshmana and Sugreeva are well and that Ravana had been killed in battle."

"O Hanuma the master of monkeys! Making clear this favourite news to Seetha, you
ought to return, taking back her message."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing Mahodara killed by Sugreeva, the mighty Mahaparsva for his part with his
red-blood eyes through anger, forthwith stirred up the terrific army of Angada with his arrows.

That demon struck down the heads of monkey-chiefs from their trunks, as wind would
throw down a fruit from its stalk.

Moreover, that demon very quickly chopped off the arms of some monkeys with his
arrows and struck down the region of the ribs of others.

Tormented by the flight of arrows of Mahaparshva, all those monkeys were downcast
with despair and lost heart.

Seeing his army depressed on being tormented by the demon, Angada who was endowed
with a great impetuosity, exhibited his tempo like an ocean on full-moon days.

Taking hold of a steel rod, with its radiance equal to that of the sun, hurled it on
Mahaparshva in that combat.

By that blow, that Mahaparsva dropped senseless and unconscious on the ground from
his chariot along with is charioteer

The energetic Jambavan, looking like a heap of black collyrium, who was exceedingly
powerful, battalion which resembled a black cloud a mountain-peak, killed his horses with his
strength and broke that chariot too.

Regaining his consciousness within a while, the mighty Mahaparshva again struck
Angada with his many arrows.

He struck Jambavan, the king of bears with three arrows in his chest and struck
Gavaksha too with many arrows.

Seeing Gavaksha and Jambavan tormented by the arrows, that Angada was infatuated
with anger and seized hold of a terrific iron rod.

Firmly holding that iron rod, which shone like the rays of the sun, with both hands
and turning it around with force, Angada son of Vali, his eyes red with anger, hurled it on that
Mahaparshva the demon, who stood at a distance, with an intention to kill him.

Hurled by the mighty Angada, that iron rod for its part, knocked the bow with the
arrow fitted to it, from the demon's hand and also his helmet.

Approaching him with speed and with anger, the valiant Angada slapped him on the
temple (root of the ear), shining with an ear-ring.

Enraged as he was, that Mahaparsva for his part, who was endowed with a great
swiftness and enormous splendour, seized hold of a huge axe in one hand.

Extremely enraged, the demon hurled that stainless and strong axe, which had been
washed in oil and which was made of steel, on Angada.

Full of anger, that Angada evaded that axe, which had been aimed by him mostly at
his left shoulder-bone.

That valiant Angada, with his prowess equal to that of his father, was quite enraged
and firmly tightened his fist resembling a thunder-bolt.

Knowing the vital parts of the body, Angada pounced his fist, which invaded like a
thunderbolt, on the boson of the demon, in the vicinity of his breasts.

With the blow of that fist in that great combat, the fleshy part of his heart was
blasted and he fell dead on the ground.

When Mahaparshva fell dead on the ground, his army got confused. A mammoth anger
arose in Ravana.

That highly profound lion's roar of the rejoiced monkeys, by its noise, was well
like the loud sound of the gods along with Indra the lord celestials, nay, by its vibrations
breaking asunder as it were the City of Lanka with its attics and town-gates.

Hearing the loud noise of monkeys, as also of the celestials in the battle-field,
the enraged Ravana the adversary of Indra, then stood prepared for a battle again.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Keeping ready Pushpaka the aerial car decorated with flowers, Vibhishana, for his
part, standing not very far, spoke to Rama (as follows):

"What more can I do?" thus spoke with haste, Vibhishana endowed as he was with
modesty and with joined palms, to Rama.

After some circumspection, Rama of great splendor, affectionately spoke the
following words to him, while Lakshmana was listening:

"Let all these monkeys and bears (ie. Denizens of forests), who performed tasks of
exertion, be honoured with tasks of exertion, be honoured with precious stones and riches of
various kinds, O Vibhishana!"

"O Vibhishana the king of demons! Lanka has conquered by you, in collaboration with
these monkeys, who never turned their backs in battles and fought joyfully, ignoring all risk to
their lives."

"All these monkeys, without exceptions, have accomplished their task. Reward their
achievement with gifts of gold and precious stones."

"Highly honoured in this way any duly cheered by you, acknowledging their services,
the chiefs of monkey-troops, will feel happy."

"All will come nearer to you, for having possessed this quality of generosity, for
propitiating them, for showing compassion to them and for having subjugated your senses. Hence, I
am reminding you."

"O king! Feeling agitated, the army deserts that king, who is bereft of all loving
qualities and who merely orders them to kill people in battle."

Hearing the words of Rama, Vibhishana honoured all those monkeys, by dispersing
precious stones and gold to them.

Thereafter, having seen on that occasion all those commanders of monkey-troops
honoured with precious stones and gold, Rama then mounted that excellent aerial car.

He mounted the aerial car along with Lakshmana, his valiant brother wielding a bow
and taking the illustrious Seetha, who was feeling abashed, in his arms.

Bestowing attention on all the monkeys as well as Vibhishana and the mighty
Sugreeva, Rama remaining in the aerial car, spoke (as follows):

"O the foremost of monkeys! This work of a friend has been accomplished by you.
Permitted by me, all of you can go, where you will."

"O Sugreeva! All that which ought to be done by an affectionate and service-minded
friend, has been done for your part by you, trembling alive as you are to righteousness.
Accompanied by your army, proceed to Kishkindha at once."

"O Vibhishana! Settle down in your kingdom at Lanka, conferred by me. Even the
celestials including Indra shall not be able to attack you."

" I am going to Ayodhya, the seat of government of my father. I bid adieu to you and
wish to take leave of you all."

Hearing the words of Rama, the monkey-chiefs, the monkeys, Vibhishana the demon and
all of them there, with their joined palms, spoke (as follows):

"We also wish to proceed to Ayodhya. You take all of us there we shall range the
gardens and groves there with rejoice."

"O the excellent king! Seeing you, drench with ablution (in the coronation ceremony)
and offering our salutations to Kausalya, we shall return to our homes."

Hearing those words of the monkeys and Vibhishana, that pious-minded Rama spoke to
those monkeys, Sugreeva and Vibhishana as follows:

"Something more dearer than everything dear will be achieved by me, if I reach
Ayodhya with the host of my friends along with all of you, for, I shall feel delighted."

"O Sugreeva! Mount the aerial cars quickly, along with the monkeys. O Vibhishana,
the king of demons! You also ascend it, along with your counsellors."

Thereupon, that Sugreeva along with the monkeys gladly ascended that wonderful
Pushpaka, the aerial car. Vibhishana together with his counselors also ascended it.

When all of them ascended, that excellent aerial car, belonging to Kubera, flew into
the sky, after having been duly authorized by Rama.

Feeling greatly rejoiced and satisfied while travelling in that splendid aerial car,
which was now in the air and was provided with the image of a swan, Rama shone like Kubera.

All those mighty monkeys, bears and demons sat comfortably and spaciously in that
wonderful aerial car.
undefined
undefined
undefined

"I on my part shall tell you, who are keenly observing about those army-chiefs, who
are ready to show their valour in the case of Rama, even without caring for their lives."

"He is a monkey called Hara, who has terrific acts to his credit. The hair on his
tail, measuring many fathoms, soft, red in colour, yellow, white and super-white, wavery and
shining like the rays of the sun standing erect thrown about are dragging along the ground."

"Hundreds and thousands of troop-leaders who are resolved to be the servants of
Sugreeva rally behind him, carrying trees with them and with an intention to attack Lanka
soon."

"O, king! Those who appear black like black-clouds and akin to black collyrium are
extremely ferocious bears, truly mighty in combat, which are in exceedingly large number,
indefinable like the other shore of an ocean, whom you are observing and serve of whom reside in
mountains, plains and on river-banks. They are all coming towards you."

"O, king! He who is standing in the middle, with terrific eyes and of fearful
appearance, encircled by all like Parjanya (the rain-god) being encircled by clouds; is the
army-chief called Dhumra, the Lord of all bears, who drinks the waters of River Narmada and resides
on an excellent mountain named Rikshavanta."

"See him who is appearing like a mountain the younger brother of Dhumra, though in
form resembling like his brother, is more distinguished in prowess. He as such is a commander of
even the mighty generals called Jambavan, who is setting on the march (for the battle). He has a
respectful behaviour towards venerable persons impatient in battle."

By the intelligent Jambavan, a great help was rendered to Indra (the lord of
celestials) in a battle between celestials and demons and many boons were obtained."

"Jambavan's giant bodied troops, resembling demons and devils, having thick hair and
endowed with unlimited energy, wander about, climbing mountain-heights and hurl massive rocks as
big as huge clouds. They do not have a fear in facing death."

"O, king! This Lord of monkeys- the commander of commanders on whom, whether he is
in a hurried fury or leaping or standing still and all the monkeys stand looking - he is called
Dambha who along with his bulky troops dwell on Sahasraksha mountain."

"He who, walking on all fours touches with his flanks, a mountain situated at a
distance of one Yojana (eight miles) and reaching an object one Yojana high, obtains it with his
body, whose huge form no other four-begged animal is having, by which intelligent monkey, battle
was given earlier to Indra the Lord of celestials on a field of battle but no defeat was sustained
by him, he is a commander of commanders and the grand-father of monkeys, famous as Samnadana by
name."

"This Samnada, whose striding prowess is equal to that of Indra the Lord of
Celestials was born of a youthful Gandharva maiden and krishnavartman for the purpose of helping
the celestials in a combat between celestials and demoneous."

"O king of demons! This commander named Krathana, the son of Visravasa, the
illustrious one, sits beneath the Jambu tree, on that mountain, the king of peaks, which is
frequented by Kinneras, and which mountain affords delight constantly to your brother. It is near
there, Krathana, that fortunate one, that powerful lord of the monkeys, whose prowess in not
confined to words in battles, sports."

"He indeed is standing, surrounded by a thousand crores of monkeys. He hopes to
crush Lanka with the help of his army."

"He who usually roams by the Ganges, sowing terror among leaders of herds of
elephants, remembering as he does the old quarrel between elephants and monkeys, thundering and
uprooting trees, he is the commander and leader of monkeys called Pramathim who dwells in
mountain-caves, subduing wild elephants."

"This excellent one among the monkeys and this army-chief of monkeys, taking shelter
in Mandara the foremost of mountains and the mountain called ushirabija alongside the River Ganga,
passes his life happily like unto Indra himself."

"A hundred thousands of monkeys; proud of their strength and prowess with their
radiant fore-arms, making a roaring noise, are following him."

"He is the leader of these high-soled monkeys. O, king! He is the commander called
Pramathi, the one difficult to be conquered."

"He whom you are beholding a cloud raised by wind is Pramathi. At that place, a
great quantity of red illumined dust is tossed about and raised by wind in various ways in
different directions. Energetic and excited army of monkeys is also stationed there along with
Pramathi."

"O, monarch! One hundred lakhs of monkeys with their black faces, with fearful
appearance and with great strength, experiencing the crossing of the bridge, surrounds the
troop-leader by name Gavaksha, a monkey and are making a roaring noise, ready to crush Lanka by
their bodily strength."

"O, king! This army-chief called Kesari, the chief of the commanders of monkeys,
wanders in Kanchana mountain wherein there are trees which yield fruits in all seasons, inhabited
by large black-bees, to which the sun circumambulates clock-wise, the mountain shining with its own
colour and splendour, by whose brightness, the animals and birds ever shine with the same hue,
whose table-land on the top of the mountain the great sages do not leave, wherein trees, all
mango-trees laden with fruits on all sides and wherein inhabit honey-bees of excellent
variety."

"O, faultless king! There are sixty thousand mountains in that beautiful golden
mountain ranges. There is an excellent mountain the middle of that mountain range as you the middle
of that demons. In that mountain range there, in the last mountain these monkeys reside. Some of
the monkeys are tawny coloured, some are white-coloured and with nails as their weapons; having
four tusks, with nails as their weapons having four tusks like lions, difficult to be approached
like tigers, resembling fire, like unto serpents vomiting poison with their very long coiling
tails, resembling elephants in rut, equal to mighty mountains and making great thunderous sound
like that of clouds. All of them stand looking on your Lanka as if they are about to crush it."

"O, king! He who stands in the middle is the powerful leader of the monkeys who ever
faces the sun, who is a wise man, eager to conquer you and is famous in the world by the name,
Shatabali. He swears to destroy Lanka with his troops."

"This Shatabali the monkey is courageous, strong, valiant and is established in his
manliness. He does not care for his life, in the cause of Rama."

"Each and every single one, like Gaja, Gavaya, Nala and a monkey called Nila is
surrounded by crores of warriors."

"Besides, other excellent monkeys residing in Vindhya mountain are quick-paced and
are impossible to be counted because of their multitude."

"O, monarch! All of them are highly prominent, their stature equal to high hills and
all of them are capable in a moment to level the earth by uprooting and razing its mountains earth
by uprooting and razing its mountains to the ground."
undefined
undefined
undefined

That sinful Ravana, infatuated by his desire for Seetha, became emaciated by his
sinful action and by his despising of well-disposed people like Vibhishana.

Though the occasion for war was lacking Ravana thought of consulting with his
ministers and well-wishers then to be a fit time.

Approaching a great chariot, covered by a golden net, adorned with gems and corals
and yoked with trained horses, Ravana mounted on it.

Ravana the excellent among demons ascended that most beautiful chariot, with a
rattling sound resembling the rumbling of a large cloud and then proceeded towards the
assembly-hall.

Warriors holding swords and shield as well as demons wearing all types of weapons,
marched in front of Ravana.

Demons wearing all types of unusual dresses and adoring various kinds of jewellery
then marched, duly surrounding him from sides and even behind.

Great chariot-warriors in chariots, on excellent elephants in rut and horses
supportively coming in different gaits, rushed after Ravana quickly.

Some had maces and iron bars in their hands. Some had javelins and iron clubs. Some
were holding axes. Some others had darts in their hands.

As Ravana was proceeding to the assembly-hall, loud blare of thousands of trumpets
along with tumultuous noise of conches were produced.

That excellently great chariot, making noise of the sound of its wheels, soon
entered the beautiful royal high-way.

The spotlessly white umbrella, held on Ravana's head, shone like a full-moon.

On his left and right sides, two fans of yak's tails with crystal handles and golden
fringes were shining.

All those demons standing on ground offered their salutation by bending their heads
and joining their palms to his the best of demons, mounted on the chariot.

Ravana the harasser of enemies, possessing great splendor, while being praised by
demons through cheers of victory, approached that organized assembly.

Ravana with great splendour, with his body shining brightly, entered that assembly
hall, which was paved with gold and silver, whose interior was wrought with pure crystal, carpeted
with skins of deer, guarded by six hundred evil spirits, ever shining and well-constructed by
Visvakarma.

Ravana, that hall, occupied a big and excellent throne embedded with jewels (cat's
eye gems), covered with skin of deer called Priyaka and furnished with pillows.

Thereafter Ravana, as a king, ordered his messengers, who were moving fast as
follows: "There is a gigantic work before us. I know what the enemies are doing. Therefore, bring
all the demons here quickly."

Hearing those words, the messenger impelled the demons staying in entertainment
places, in bedrooms or in gardens and went without fear to every house in Lanka.

Some of the demons mounted beautiful chariots; some mounted wild and strong horses
and some mounted on elephants. Some others went on foot.

That city, extremely crowded with chariots elephants and horses rushing fast
together, appeared like birds rushing fast in the sky.

Parking horses, elephants and various kinds vehicles like chariots, they entered by
foot the assembly-hall as a mountain-cave is entered by lions.

Touching the feet of the king and greeted in turn by the king, some sat down on
seats, some others on mats (of Kusa grass) and others on the ground.

Congregating in the assembly hall at the king's command, those demons took their
position round Ravana the king of demons, each according to their rank.

Ministers who were scholars well versed in deciding action those endowed with good
qualities, those who were all-knowing, king's ministers who could perceive things by their power of
intellect and many warriors in hundreds, gathered according to their importance in that assembly
hall, wrapped with gold, for providing felicity in all actions.

The high-souled and illustrious VibhiShana ascended an excellent auspicious and
spacious chariot yoked with good horses with its various parts decked in gold and drove towards the
assembly-hall of Ravana his elder brother.

Then, that younger brother Vibhishana told Ravana his name and offered salutation to
the feet. Suka and Prahasta followed suit. Ravana gave them suitable seats separately.

The aroma of the best aloe and sandal paste painted on the persons as also of
garlands worn round the necks of those demons duly adorned with ornaments of gold and gems and
attired in excellent clothes diffused all round in the assembly-hall.

The assembled persons there did not yell loudly. None uttered untruth or even talked
vociferously. All of them were ready for action and were endowed with terrible energy. All of them
sat, perceiving their lord's face.

In that assembly, that Ravana, full of mind, shone with brilliance among the
assemblage of those demons possessing great strength, like Devendra (the Lord of heaven) amidst
Vasus (a class of gods)
undefined
undefined
undefined

Vibhishana, who always arrived at a settlement in matters of virtue, pleasure and
wealth and who was terrible in his act, on arrival of the dawn, entered the palace of Ravana.

Ravana's palace was looking like a mass of rocks, elevated like a mountain-peak,
well-divided into spacious apartments and occupied by eminent men.

It was inhabited by prime ministers, who were intelligent and beloved. It was
guarded on all sides by demons, who were trust worthy and efficient.

The air was filled with the sighing breaths of elephants in rut, with tumultuous
noise produced by the blowing of conches and made to resound by an ensemble of musical
instruments.

The palace was filled with a number of women-folk. It was having principal passages
in which spoken words were heard. It was having turrets made of pure gold and adorned with
excellent decors.

The palace was like an abode of Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and of Maruts
(strom-gods) filled with a collection of jewels resembling a house of Nagas (serpent-gods).

The valiant Vibhishana with great splendour entered that mansion of his elder
brother, Ravana, like the sun with rays outstretched with splendour entering a big cloud.

Vibhishana with great radiance, heard the auspicious sounds of felicitous recital of
prayers uttered by the knowers of Vedas (scriptural texts), wishing for the victory of his
brother.

Vibhishana of great strength, saw Brahmins who know Mantras (sacred texts) and
Brahmanas, respected and offered with pots filled of curd, clarified butter as well as with flowers
and unbroken rice.

The mighty armed Vibhishana, being adored by the deomons and shining by his own
splendour, offered salutation to Ravana the younger brother of Kubera (the lord of riches), who
occupied the throne.

Practicing customary formalities, Vibhishana who knew the code of conduct, obtained
a seat adorned with gold, as endowed to him by a glance of the king.

In the presence of ministers and in privation, Vibhishana spoke to powerful Ravana
the words convinced of reason and which were very much beneficial.

Vibhishana, who could discriminate between good and evil things in the world, having
sought the favour from his eldest (half-) brother by means of soothing words arranged in an order,
spoke in consonance with place, time and purpose.

"O, annihilator of enemies! We are seeing inauspicious omens, since Seetha arrived
here."

"Even if the sacrificial fire is fed with oblations while uttering a proper set of
Mantras (Spiritual texts), the fire is not flaring up well, emitting sparks, its flames are
enveloped in smoke and are coming forth, polluted with soot."

"Serpents are seen at the corner of the sacrificial post which is nearest the fire,
also in houses keeping sacrificial fire and in places where sacred studies are made. Ants are seen
in things to be offered as oblations."

"Cow's milk is getting curdled. Excellent elephants are bereft of rut. Horses are
neighing miserably and are not rejoiced in eating grass."

"O, king! Donkeys, camels and mules shed tears, losing their hair and even if
treated asper medical procedures are not getting cured."

"Crows in flocks are crying cruelly from all sides and are seen in crowds assembled
together on house-tops."

"Vultures fly to and fro in circles over the city. Jackals are crying inauspiciously
at the approach of both dawn and the dusk."

"At city-gates are heard loud cries of carnivorous animals gathered in groups, with
thundering noise."

"O, brave man! Hence, when the actions of evil forces are happening in this way,
this atonement is appropriate that Seetha be given away to Rama and I like it."

"O, emperor! If I am speaking this because of infatuation or greed, in that case
also, you ought not to find fault with me."

"These bad omens are being seen indeed by demons and lady-demons of the city and of
the gynaeceum as well as all these people here."

"All your ministers have abstained to pass this counsel to you. Whatever is seen or
heard, it is to be told certainly by me. Hence, you ought to do according to a justification of
things for the occasion."

Vibhishana, the half- bother spoke these beneficial words to Ravana, the best among
demons in the midst of his half-brother's ministers.

Ravana, who had evil inclination, heard those words, which were beneficial very
well-meant, soft, conformable to reason and suitable for the past future and present times, got
enraged and uttered this reply.

"I do not see any fear from whom so ever. Rama cannot obtain Seetha by any means.
How Rama even along with Indra and the celestials can stand before me in battle?"

Ravana, who annihilated the army of celestials and who was very powerful with an
impetuous valour, thus spoke and then sent away Vibhishana, who had spoken honestly.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Beholding the demon, Dhumraksha of terrible prowess coming forth, all the monkeys
waiting for the war, roared with joy.

A highly tumultuous battle was seen between those monkeys and demons, who were
slaying each other, with terrible trees, lances and maces.

The terrible monkeys were moved down on all sides by the demons. The demon too were
levelled down to the earth with trees by the monkeys.

Enraged with anger, the demons, on their part, paralyzed the monkeys with sharp and
frightful arrows, going as straight as wings of eagle.

While being torn asunder by the demons with terrible maces, spears, hammers,
frightful iron bars and variegated tridents, the mighty monkeys fearlessly accomplished their tasks
with an excitement born of anger.

While their bodies were split up by the tridents and their limbs broken by arrows,
those leaders of monkeys took up trees and rocks there to fight.

Those terribly swift monkeys, roaring aloud harassed the valiant demons at all
places, by calling out their names.

That awful battle with all kinds of rocks and trees furnished with many branches
between monkeys and demons appeared wonderful.

Some demons were crushed by monkeys, who conquered fear and some blood-sucking
demons vomited blood from their mouths.

Some demons were slashed open at their sides. Some were formed into a heap by the
trees. Some others were crushed by stones and yet others torn to pieces by the monkeys teeth.

With their standards crushed and broken, their swords snapped and their chariots
overturned, some demons were perturbed.

Crushed by the great rocks of monkeys, the earth was scattered with corpses of great
elephants resembling hills and horses with their riders.

The monkeys of terrific prowess rushed upon the demons, flinging themselves upon
them with great bounds horizontically and vertically and scratching their faces with their sharp
nails.

With their faces dejected very much, their hair torn out and maddened by the smell
of blood, those demons fell on the ground.

Some other demons of exceeding valour, who were enraged, very much, ran up towards
the monkeys to attack them with their palms having a diamond-like blow.

The monkeys, receiving that sharp shock, with even a greater ferocity, crushed the
demons with blows of their fists, feet teeth and trees.

Seeing his army routed, Dhumraksha that lion among the demons, in his anger began to
create a blood-shed of the monkeys wishing to fight.

Some monkeys pierced with spears lost rivers of blood while others struck down by
blows of axe, fell to the earth's surface.

Some were crushed by iron bars, others torn by harpoons, some others pierced by
javelins, all exhausted and lost their lives.

Slain in battle by infuriated demons, some monkeys, drenched with blood, fell on the
ground and some others disappeared, having been driven away.

With pierced hearts, some monkeys were made to lie down on one side. Some were torn
asunder by tridents that even their intestines came out.

That mighty battle assumed most awful proportions in that monkeys and demons were
crammed with rocks, trees and multitude of weapons.

With the bow-strings as the tuneful lute, the neighing of horses as a measure rhythm
and the trumpeting of elephants as the vocal music, the whole battle resembled a symphony.

Dhumraksha on his part, wielding a bow in his hand and laughing at the battle-front,
made those monkeys to run away to all the quarters by a shower of his arrows.

Seeing the army perturbed due to tormented by Dhumraksha, Hanuman was enraged and
turned towards him, taking a gigantic rock in his hands.

Hanuman, who was equal in strength to his father, with his eyes inflamed with anger,
flung the rock on the chariot of Dhumraksha.

Beholding the befalling rock, Dhumraksha lifting his mace hurriedly, jumped down
speedily from the chariot and stood there on the earth.

Shattering his chariot with its wheels, its pole, its crest along with banner and
bows, that rock rolled down to the ground.

Thereafter, Hanuman the son of Maruta (the wind-god), after breaking the chariot,
destroyed the demons with trunks of trees furnished with their branches.

With their heads crushed, the demons were drenched with blood. Some others were
crunched by the trees and fell down to the earth.

Having driven away the army of demons, Hanuma born of Maruta, breaking off the peak
of a mountain, ran towards Dhumraksha.

The valiant Dhumraksha lifted his mace and making a roaring sound, ran towards that
Hanuman who was rushing on him suddenly.

Thereafter, Dhumraksha with an outrage, brought down that mace studded with
countless spikes on the head of that Hanuma.

That Hanuman, who was endowed with an energy similar to the wind, was in no way
disturbed by that blow but struck Dhumraksha on the middle of his skull with his rocky peak.

That Dhumraksha, struck by the rocky peak, which shattered all his limbs, soon fell
down on the ground like a mountain crumbling.

Seeing Dhumraksha having been killed, the demons left surviving were frightened of
being killled by the monkeys and re entered Lanka.

That illustrious Hanuman the son of Pavana having destroyed his enemies, causing
rivers of blood to flow, weary of slaughter of the enemies, with delight, received the cordial
felicitations by the monkeys.
undefined
undefined
undefined

In that situation, Vibhishana then spoke the following words, which were hostile to
the enemies and advantageous to Lakshmana.

"Let this army of demons which is seen here, dark as a cloud, be quickly engaged in
battle, by the monkeys using rocks as thier weapons."

"O Lakshmana! Make an effort to break this mighty army. When this army is destroyed,
Indrajit also will become visible."

"You as such, rush forward quickly, gushing out arrows, equal to Indra's
thunderbolt, on the enemies, so long as this sacrificial act of Indrajit is not actually carried
through."

"O hero! Make a short work of Indrajit, the evil minded, who is interested in
performing conjuring tricks, who is unjust, engaged in cruel acts and who brings fear to all the
worlds."

Hearing the words of Vibhishana, Lakshmana, having auspicious marks, showered forth
streams of arrows in the direction of Indrajit.

Bears and monkeys, who fight was gigantic trees, rushed towards that army of demons,
drawn up in battle-array.

The demons too, with an intent to kill the monkeys in battle, attacked them with
sharp arrows, sowrds, spears and javelins.

That tumultuous battle between the monkeys and the demons rendered Lanka noisy on
all sides with its great uproar.

The sky was covered with weapons of various shapes, sharp arrows, trees and tossed
mountain tops.

Those demons of ugly faces and arms, hurling weapons on the monkeys, created a great
fear.

Even the monkeys too struck and killed all the demons in the battle, with various
types of trees and mountain-peaks.

A great fear developed among the demons who were fighting with mighty leaders of
bears and monkeys endowed with colossal bodies.

Hearing that his own army being tormented by the enemies, was dejected; that
unconquerable Indrajit left off, without performing the sacrificial rite.

That enraged Indrajit, coming out from the gloominess of the trees, ascended his
firmly yoked chariot which had already been united

That awful Indrajit, armed with terrific bow and arrows, looking like a mass of
black collyrium with his blood-red eyes, appeared like the destructive Death.

Just on seeing Indrajit being on a chariot, that army of demons with a terrific
speed, turned back, wishing to fight with Lakshmana.

At that time, Hanuma the destroyer of enemies looking like a mountain, uplifted an
absolutely unpaalleled large tree. Consuming that army of demons, as a fire at the time of
universal dissolution, the aforesaid monkey made that army unconscious on the battle field, with
many trees.

Immediately on seeing Hanuma destroying thier army rapidly, thousands of demons
hurled weapons on him.

Approaching Hanuma looking like a mountain, the demons bearing pointed pikes struck
him from all sides with pkes, those carrying swords in their hands with swords, those carring
javelins in their hands with jalins, with iron rods with maces; those armed with sharp-edged spears
with spears, as also with bright-looking spears, with hundreds of cylindrical wooden pieces studded
with iron spikes, with steel hammers, ,with awful axes, with slings for the rwing stones, with
their thunderbolt-like fists and slaps which fell like flashes of lighning. Then, the enraged
Hanuma made a colossal destruction of those demons.

That Indrajit saw Hanuma, the foremost of monkeys, looking like a mountain,
fearlessly killing his enemies.

He spoke the following words tohis charioteer: "Take the chariot to the place where
that monkey is standing. If we neglect him, he will surely destroy our demons."

Hearing the words of that Indrajit, the charioteer went, carrying that very
unconquerable Indrajit sitting in the chariot, to the place where Hanuma was there.

Coming close to Hanuma, that unconquerable Indrajit hurled swords, sharp-edged
spears and axes on the head of Hanuma.

Receiving those terrible weapons, that Hanuma spoke, seized as he was, with great
rage, the following words:

"O evil-minded Indrajit! If you are valiant, fight with me. Coming nearer to Hanuma,
you will not return alive."

"O foolish fellow! If you enter into a duel with me, fight with your arms. Withstand
my force in the battle-field. Then you will be considered as the best among the demons."

Vibhishana told Lakshmana in the following words that while with bow upraised,
Indrajit sought to kill Hanuma.

"Having seated in a chariot, Indrajit, who conquered Indra, is seeking to kill
Hanuma."

"O Lakshmana! Kill that Indrajit with your terrific arrows of incomparable
workmanship, which ward off the enemies and putting an end to their lives."

Hearing the words of Vibhishana, who was fearful to his adversaries, the
great-souled Lakshmana saw Indrajit, who closely resembled a mountain, seated in a chariot, of
terrific strength and who was difficult to approach.
undefined
undefined
undefined

The devastation of his army through Angada's prowess filled the mighty Vajradamstra
with anger.

Stretching his terrific bow, like unto Indra's thunder bolt, he assailed the monkey
battalions with a flood of arrows.

Then, the foremost of the demons mounted on chariots, fought the battle with every
kind of weapon.

The monkeys, those valiant bulls among the Plavagas, assembling on all sides, fought
with rocks.

Then in that battle there, the demons abundantly hurled thousands of weapons on the
foremost of monkeys.

The monkeys of mighty prowess, resembling elephants in rut, showered down giant
trees and huge lumps of rock on the demons.

Between those courageous warriors, the demons and the monkeys, who never retreated
in battle, a tremendous struggle ensued.

Some monkeys and demons, with their shattered heads, but bereft of arms and legs,
lay on the earth bathed in blood with their bodies wounded by weapons, a prey to herons vultures
and crows or devoured by troops of jackals.

Monkeys and demons fell on the battle-field; headless trunks leaps up to the terror
of all the fearful, their limbs hacked to pieces in the combat.

Thereafter, under the eyes of Vajradamshtra, all his army of demons were killed and
broken up by the monkey-troops.

Seeing the demons terrified with fear and decimated by the monkeys, that powerful
Vajradamshtra, his eyes red with anger, bow in hand, penetrated the army of monkeys, sowing panic
among them.

Thereafter, in his fury, the vigorous Vajradamshtra dispatched those monkeys with
arrows resembling wings of an eagle that flew straight to their target and pierced seven, eight,
nine or five of his opponents simultaneously, thus destroying them.

With their limbs crippled by those arrows and frightened, those monkey battalions
sought refuge with Angada, as all creatures with Brahma the Lord of Creation.

When he beheld those monkey troops fleeing in disorder, Angada the son Vali
exchanged glances of hatred with Vajradamshtra.

Both Vajradamshtra and Angada fought against each other like a lion and an elephant
in rut. They strolled din a tremendous fury.

Thereafter, that Vajradamshtra knocked the mighty Angada at his vital organs with
his arrows resembling hundred thousand flames of fire.

With all his limbs drenched in blood, the mighty Angada having a terrific prowess
threw a tree on Vajradamshtra.

That unperplexed demon, seeing that tree falling on him, cut it into innumerable
pieces which fell in heaps on earth.

Witnessing the strength of Vajradamshtra, Angada that lion among the monkeys seized
hold of a large rock and emitting a shout, threw it on him.

As the rock descended, that vigorous Vajradamshtra leaping down from his chariot,
armed with his mace, stood waiting unperplexed, on the battle-field.

Meanwhile, the rock thrown by Angada, falling into the forefront of the battle, then
crushed the chariot with its wheels shafts and horses

Thereafter, Angada the monkey, seizing another large peak of a mountain adorned with
trees, threw it on Vajradamshtra's head.

Beginning to vomit blood, Vajradamshtra became fainted, clenching his mace
convulsively and breathing heavily for a moment.

Regaining his consciousness, Vajradamshtra the demon was very much enraged and hit
Angada full on the chest with his mace.

Leaving his mace, he performed a pugilistic encounter there. Both the monkey and the
demon thus hit each other in that combat.

Exhausted by the blows, spitting blood, those valiant warriors were like the planets
Mars and Mercury.

Then, Angada the lion among the monkeys, possessing a great splendour, uprooted a
tree full with many flowers and fruits and stood waiting.

The demon too seized hold of a shield covered with the hide of a bull as well as a
great beautiful sword decorated richly with a multitude of golden bells.

Thirsting for victory, the monkeys and the demons, making roaring sounds, roamed
about in different ways and collided with each other.

With their gaping wounds, they shone like a pair of kimshuka trees in blossom.
Exhausted were both of them while fighting and they sank their knees on the earth.

Angada, the foremost of the monkeys, just after a moment, with his glittering eyes,
rose up like a serpent struck with a stick.

The mighty Angada assaulted the giant head of Vajradamshtra with a well-sharpened
and stainless sword.

Struck by the sword, that charming head of Vajradamshtra, with his limbs drenched in
blood and eyes rolling, fell into two pieces.

Seeing Vajradamshtra having been slain, the demons, deluded with fear, fled
panic-stricken towards Lanka, harassed by the monkeys with their down-cast faces, their heads bowed
in shame.

The mighty Angada experienced a great joy amidst the monkey forces, honoured by them
for his high courage and he resembled the Lord of a Thousand Eyes surrounded by the celestials.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing those words spoken by the mighty Kumbhakarna of colossal body and large
arms, Mahodara spoke as follows:

"O Kumbhakarna! Though born in a good race, you are audacious, having the perception
of an ordinary man as also arrogant. You are unable to know the right to be done at all times."

"O Kumbhakarna! It is not that the king does not know about the prudent and the
imprudent conducts. Due to childishness and audacity, you, on your part, are craving merely to
talk."

"The king of demons, knowing about apportioning of place and time, understands the
subject about strengthening and mining (of relationships) as well as his own position and the
position of others."

"What would a wise man attempt to do that which cannot be achieved by a man of
ordinary intellect, though strong, does not sever his elders?"

"You are speaking as though virtue, wealth and pleasure are dwelling separately (in
water-tight compartments). By their very nature, there is no accurate description to know those
things."

"Action alone is indeed the means to get all the consequences. Even sinful acts
spring up into a fruit of prosperity!"

"Acts instrumental to virtue and wealth as well as other acts (instrumental to
injustice and non-value) have just the prosperity as their fruit. But, acts instrumental to
injustice and non-value gain the fruit of offence of omission."

Living beings reap the fruit of good actions in this and in the other world.
However, he who remains diligently devoted to actions with a view to attaining sensuous pleasure
enjoys blessing even in this life."

"In such a situation, this act of pursuit of sensuous pleasure has been cherished in
his heart by the king and was approved by us. What violation is there in doing this daring act
against the enemy?"

"Regarding the reason which you have adduced for marching all alone for the
encounter, I shall tell you what is irrelevant and not so good."

"How will you conquer, single-handed, that Rama by whom several mighty demons were
destroyed in Janasthana earlier."

"Are you not seeing those frightened demons (though highly energetic) who are now
staying in the City, but who were earlier conquered by Rama in Janasthana?"

"Though you know that Rama, the son of Dsasratha, is like an enraged lion, you wish
to awaken a serpent, who is sleeping."

"Who would be competent to approach that Rama, who is forever shining with a
splendour, dangerous to catch-up and as unbearable as death?"

"Standing face-to-face with that enemy is all remaining in doubt. Going there
single-handed does not indeed find favour with me."

"Having lost his advantage, who would feel inclined to reduce to submission, an
enemy, who is rich in advantage and determined to lay down his life, as an ordinary person?"

"O Kumbhakarna, the foremost among the demons! How do you wish to combat with Rama,
with whom none in the human beings is equal and who is equal of Indra and the sun?"

Having thus spoken to the enraged Kumbhakarna, Mahodara on his part spoke as
follows, in the midst of demons, to Ravana, who made the people cry.

"Why are you delaying further, after having captured Seetha already? If you do so
wish, Seetha will be submissive to you."

"Some strategy has been discovered by me, as a means of bringing her round. If it is
found agreeable to your intellect, then listen to it.

"Announce (by a beat of drum in the city-streets) that myself, Dvijihva, Samhraadi,
Kumbhakarna and Vitardana these five demons are setting out for the battle to kill Rama."

"Thereupon, having gone to the battle field deliberately, we shall give him a fight.
If we conquer your enemies, there is no need for any strategies to us."

"Otherwise, if our enemy survives, we, who have engaged in the fight, then shall
implement the plan which was resolved by us in the mind."

"Moistened with blood on having our bodies torn with arrows marked with the name of
Rama engraved on them, we shall come back here from the battle."

Saying "Rama as well as Lakshmana has been devoured by us", we shall clasp your
feet. You fully grant our desire."

"O king! Then, have it proclaimed by beating of trumpets in the entire city, on the
back of an elephant, that Rama has been killed along with his brother and his army."

"O annihilator of enemies! Becoming pleased for the name-sake, arrange to bestow on
your servants, objects of enjoyment, other desired objects and gold."

"Then, present garlands, garments and cosmetics to champions as well as abundant
gifts to other warriors. Drink yourself delighted."

"When this thick rumour has gone to all sides that Rama along with his companions
have been devoured by the demons and you approach Seetha in private and restoring her to confidence
and even conciliating her, tempt her with gold and grain, as well as luxuries and precious
tones."

"By this false pretence, creating fear and anguish, Seetha who thinks she lost her
husband, will submit reluctantly to your will."

"Believing that her charming husband is destroyed, Seetha from her hopelessness and
feminine feeling of flexibility, will come to your will."

"Seetha, who grew up with comfort, who is deserving of happiness; but emaciated with
grief, knowing that her happiness depends on you, will by all means come near to you."

"After contemplating very well, I have conveyed like this. As soon as you see Rama,
a calamity will happen. While you stay here itself without fighting, you will obtain a great
benefit of happiness. Do not become restless."

"O king! An emperor who conquers his enemies without losing his army, without
meeting with danger and without a combat will obtain for long, a great fame, merit, prosperity and
glory."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the auspicious words thus spoken by Rama, Lord Shiva the Supreme Lord
thereupon delivered the following still more beautiful speech:

"O lotus-eyed, long-armed, broad-chested, annihilator of enemies and excellent among
those upholding the cause of virtue! Thank heaven! You accomplished this task."

"Fortunately has the fear born of Ravana - which increased the severe darkness on
the entire world has been removed by you, on the battle-field, O Rama!"

"You are fit to go to the heaven, by comforting the depressed Bharata and the
illustrious Kausalya as well as seeing Kaikeyi and Sumitra, the mother of Lakshmana having got the
sovereignty of Ayodhya, bringing delight to your friends, stabilizing the back-bone in the race of
Ikshvaku, getting excellent glory by performing a horse-sacrifice and by granting riches to
Brahmanas."

"This king Dasaratha, your father in this mortal world and the highly glorious as
well as the venerable person, is seated in an aerial car, O Rama!"

"Having been delivered by you, his (godly) son, the glorious king obtained the abode
of Indra the lord of celestials. you offer your respectful salutation to him, along with Lakshmana,
your brother."

Hearing the words of Shiva, Rama along with Lakshmana his brother, offered their
salutation to their father, seated on the topmost part of an aerial car.

The lord Rama along with Lakshmana his brother saw their father, who was blazing
with his own splendour and clad in brilliant garments.

Then the king Dasaratha the lord who was sitting in the aerial car, in an excellent
seat, was filled with excessive delight to see his son (Rama), who was dearer to him than life.
Placing him in his lap and embracing him in his arms, he thereupon commenced his speech as
follows:

"O Rama! Separated from you, the heaven is not a liking to me, nor the respect given
to me by the foremost of celestials. I am telling you the truth."

"Today, there is a great joy for me, for having seen you, fully satisfied in your
mind, now that your enemies have been destroyed and you have fully gone through the period of
exile."

"O excellent among the eloquent! The words, which were uttered by Kaikeyi, with an
aim to send you into exile, are still imprinted in my heart."

"Seeing you in a fine fettle with Lakshmana and hugging you today, I stand
completely rid of sorrow - even as the sun is freed from mist."

"O great-souled son! I have been redeemed by you, my worthy son, even as Kahola a
brahmana was redeemed by Ashtavakra."

"O gently one! I recognize you now to be the Supreme person, duly enjoined here by
the rulers of gods, for the destruction of Ravana."

"Blessed indeed is Kausalya, who will see you, the destroyer of your enemies,
returned home from the forest."

"Blessed indeed are those men, who will see you returned to the City of Ayodhya and
consecrated on the throne as a lord of the earth."

"I desire to see you, re-united with the mighty Bharata, who is affectionate towards
you, honest and virtuous."

"O gentle one! You spent fourteen years, residing in the forest with Lakshmana and
Seetha."

"You completed the term of your exile. My pledge was implemented by you. The
celestials too have been fully gratified, by your killing of Ravana in battle."

"O the destroyer of enemies! A laudable act has been done and glory has been earned
by you. Getting consecrated on the throne, may you attain a long life, along with your
brothers."

To Dasaratha, who was thus speaking, Rama with joined palms in salutation, submitted
(as follows): "Be gracious to Kaikeyi and Bharata, O the knower of virtues!"

You will remember those words spoken by you saying, I disown you, with your son
(Bharata)'. May that terrific curse not touch Kaikeyi and her son, O Lord!"

Saying 'May it be" to Rama who stood with joined palms embraced Lakshmana. Dasaratha
again uttered the following words to Lakshmana:

"A great gratification has been rendered to me and reward in the form of religious
merit earned by you in that you served Rama and Seetha, the princess of Videha kingdom, with
devotion."

"Rama, being pleased with you, you will attain religious merit and extensive glory
on earth, as also heaven and excellent power O knower of righteousness!"

"Happiness to you, O the augmentor of the joy of Sumitra, your mother! Serve Rama
well. Rama forever is intent on advancing the interests of the entire world."

"These three worlds, including Indra Siddhas (a class of demi-gods) and great sages
pay homage to the great-souled Rama as a Supreme person, on approaching him."

"O great one! O the destroyer of adversaries! Rama has been spoken of as the
unmanifest and the imperishable Brahama (the absolute), established by the Vedas, the heart of gods
and the secret of all gods."

"Having served him, along with Seetha with devotion, you obtained the reward of the
practice of all virtues as also celebrity, abundantly."

Thus speaking to Lakshmana, the (former) king, addressing his daughter-in-law
standing before him with joined palms as "My daughter", slowly and affectionately advised her as
follows:

"No wrath indeed should be rendered by you towards Rama, for having repudiated you.
This has been done by him, wishing for your welfare and in order to demostrate your purity."

"This act (of entering into fire) which has been done by you and which reveals your
true character, my daughter, is the most difficult task to perform for other ladies and will
overshadow their illustriousness."

"You need not be instructed about the matter of rendering service to your husband.
But, it is to be told certainly by me. He is your supreme deity."

Having instructed thus to his sons and Seetha, the King Dasaratha who was born in
Raghu dynasty went to the abode of Indra, the lord of celestials, by an aerial car.

With a satisfied self, Dasaratha the excellent king of noble-mindedness endowed with
splendour, taking leave of his sons and Seetha and mounting the aerial car, went to the abode of
Indra, the chief of gods.
undefined
undefined
undefined

That tumultuous sound, set up by the monkeys who were full of martial ardour,
arrested the attention of Ravana and his demons.

Hearing that mighty clamour, sounding smooth and deep, Ravana spoke to his ministers
who surrounded him.

"A great uproar, resembling the rumbling of clouds, has arisen from that horde of
rejoiced monkeys. Undoubtedly their joy is great, their mighty roars are agitating the briny ocean
itself.

"Those two brothers Rama and Lakshmana were tied by sharp arrows. This sound of a
great magnitude being heard by me, is begetting an apprehension in me."

Having spoken thus to his ministers, Ravana the Lord of Demons said to his demons
who stood round him there (as follows)

"You immediately discover from what cause this general rejoicing among all these
monkeys coming for the their present grievous situation!'

Thus commanded by Ravana, they mounted the rampart very briskly and saw the army
lead by the high-souled Sugreeva and also the highly fortunate Rama and Lakshmana who were relieved
of the terrific shackle of arrow a and risen up together. All the demons felt desponded on seeing
it.

With their hearts trembling with fear and faces turning pale, all those terrific
demons descended from the rampart and approached Ravana.

With downcast faces, those demons skilled in speech, faithfully informed Ravana of
those unpleasant tidings, saying:

"The two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, whom Indrajit had bound with his benumbing
shafts and whose arms he had pinioned, are free from the arrows which paralyzed them and now appear
on the field of battle, as two strong elephants who have snapped their fetters."

Hearing their words, the might Ravana was filled with anxiety and fury. His face
became pale (and he spoke as follows):

"If my adversaries, having thus been bound by Indrajit are freed, despite their
injuries in battle by his formidable arrows which were infallible those rare boons, resembling
serpents, bright as the sun, I perceive my entire army in jeopardy."

"Those very arrows, bright as fire, which in battle have taken the life of my
enemies, have now been rendered void indeed!"

Having spoken thus in furious tones, hissing like a snake, he addressed a demon
called Dhumraksha who was seated amidst the demons and said.

"You, with a terrific prowess, go quickly with a considerable force of demons and
slay Rama, Lakshmana and his monkeys."

Thus commanded by Ravana, the intelligent Dhumraksha, going past from there, quickly
departed front her royal palace.

Having crossed that gate, he spoke to the General of the Forces as follows:
"Mobilize the army. Hasten quickly. What need is there for the delay?"

Hearing the words of Dhumraksha, the general of forces, having the army which
followed him, kept the army ready quickly, as per Ravana's command.

Those strong demons of terrific form, making sounds with bells hung on their bodies,
joyously surrounded Dhumraksha.

Furnished with every kind of weapon, brandishing spears, hammers, maces, harpoons,
sticks, iron cudgels, bars, clubs, javelins, missiles, nooses and axes, those terrible demons
sallied forth with the noise of thunder.

Clad in mail, mounted on chariots that were magnificently dressed with flags and
decorated with bands of pure gold, harnessed to mules of many heads or steeds of exceeding
fleetness or elephants in furious rut, some other excellent demons went forth like veritable
tigers.

Dhumraksha, with a mule-like clatter, set out in a celestial chariot to which mules
adorned with gold and heads of deer and lions were hitched.

That Dhumraksha of mighty prowess, surrounded by demons, set forth amidst mocking
laughter, through the western gate where the army-chief Hanuman was stationed.

As he mounted and advanced in an excellent chariot harnessed to mules, whose voices
he emulated, birds of ill-omen in the sky obstructed that advancing demon of very terrible and
fearful appearance.

A highly terrible vulture alighted on the top of his chariot, while those devourers
of corpses clustered on the point of his standard.

Streming with blood, a huge decapitated trunk fell to earth, emitting inarticulate
noise in Dhumraksha's vicinity and the sky rained down blood. The earth trembled.

The wind with noise resembling a thunder blew adversely. Every quarter, obscured by
abundant darkness, did not dazzle.

Seeing those terrible amones that appeared in all their horror to the demons,
Dhumraksha became perturbed. Terror seized all the demons who were advancing in front of
Dhumraksha.

Then, Dhumraksha, the highly terrible and strong demon, surrounded by a multitude of
demons, eager to enter into combat, set out and beheld that army of a multitude of monkeys,
resembling a flood, protected by the arms of Rama.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Thereupon, Matali refreshed the memory of Rama as follows: "O the valiant one! Why
are you still carrying out the battle with Ravana as though you are unaware (of how to dispose of
him)?

"O lord! You can employ a mystic missile presided over by Brahma the lord of
creation. The time for his destruction has come now, as expressed by the celestials."

Then, the valiant Rama, who was reminded thus by Matali, took hold of a blazing
arrow, which was given by Brahma and which in turn was given to him by the glorious sage, Agastya
earlier in the battle-field and which looked like a hissing serpent.

Having been made formerly for Indra, the lord of celestials by Brahma, the lord of
creation of infinite strength, it was bestowed in the past on the ruler of gods, who was desirous
of conquering the three worlds.

In its feathers, wind was established. In its end-point were the fire and the sun.
In its heaviness were Mounts Meru and Mandara. Its shaft was made of ether.

Provided with good shaft decked with gold, the arrow which had its body shining, had
been made up of the efficacy of all the elements and an illuminating power of the sun.

Blazing like a fire at the time of universal dissolution enveloped in smoke and
looking like a venomous snake, it was swift in action and capable of bursting hosts of men,
elephants and horses.

It broke gate-ways, iron bars, and even mountains. Smeared witht he blood of various
victims and quoted with their marrow, it presented a very terrific appearance.

That arrow had an efficacy of a thunder bolt, loud-sounding, tearing off armies of
adversaries in many battles and creating fear to all, like a hissing serpent.

It was giving perennial feed to vultures, eagles, cranes, troops of jackals and
demons in the battle-field, possessing a form of Yama the lord of Death and was fearful.

That arrow bestowed joy on the monkey-leaders and destroyed the demons. It was made
speedy, by tying various kinds of beautiful coloured feathers of Garuda, the king of eagles, to
it.

Making it sacred by a special formula as per the procedure specified in scriptures,
Rama who was endowed with an extraordinary strength then fixed that arrow which was the foremost
among the three worlds, capable of removing the fear of Ikshwaku dynasty, taking away the glory of
the enemies and bestowing joy to one's own self on his bow.

While that excellent arrow was being fixed by Rama, all the beings were frightened
and the earth trembled.

That enraged Rama, stretching his bow well and with an attentive mind, hurled that
arrow which can tear off the vitals, towards Ravana.

That arrow, which was inviolable as a thunderbolt hurled by the arms of Indra and
irresistible as Yama the lord of Death, fell upon Ravana's chest.

That arrow, released with great speed and which was capable of destroying the body,
tore off the heart of that evil-minded Ravana.

That arrow, which was capable of causing death to the body, after taking away the
life of Ravana and having been anointed with blood, penetrated the earth.

Smeared with blood on having killed Ravana and thereby accomplishing its mission,
that arrow re-entered its own quiver (of Rama) silently.

From the hands of the slain Ravana, who was being separated from his life, fell his
bow with its arrows (fitted to it), at the same time coinciding indeed with his life-breath.

Having lost his life, that king of demons for his part, who was endowed with
terrible swiftness and invested with great splendour, fell down from the chariot to the ground ,
like Vritra the demon when the latter was struck down by the thunderbolt.

Seeing Ravana fallen down on earth, the surviving demons whose king had been killed,
were panic stricken and ran away to all sides.

The monkeys, who fought with trees, fell upon the demons from all sides. Seeing the
killing of Rvana, the monkeys assumed a triumphant appearance.

Tormented by the monkeys, the demons rushed back with panic towards Lanka, with
faces looking miserable and tears flowing down, their supporter having been killed.

Roaring shouts of joy, quite rejoiced as they were, and proclaiming Rama's victory
and the killing of Ravana in his hands, the monkeys behaved like conquerors.

Then the cheerful kettle-drum of the gods reverberated in the sky. Very pleasant
winds, carrying divine odour, blew there.

Pouring over the chariot of Rama quite fascinating shower of flowers, which was
difficult to be accomplished (elsewhere), fell from the heavens to the earth on that occasion.

Excellent pronouncements of the great-souled gods saying "well done! Bravo!",
combined with a panegyric in praise of Rama, was distinctly heard in the sky.

When Ravana, the cruel demon and the terror of all the worlds, was killed, a great
rejoice filled the hearts of gods and charanas the celestial bards.

Having been pleased with the killing of Ravana, Rama then fulfilled the desire of
Sugreeva, Angada and Vibhishana.

Then, troops of celestials got their mental peace. All the quarters were brightened
up and the sky became clear. The earth did not tremble. The wind blew gently. The sun too shed a
steady light.

Rejoiced with the victory in battle, Sugreeva, Vibhishana and Angada together with
Lakshmana along with their friends paid their respects with due ceremony to Rama, who looked
charming.

That Rama, the delight of Dasaratha, for his part, who had just killed his enemy and
thus who was steadfast in his vows and who was endowed with a great splendour, who stood surrounded
on the battle-field by his own people and the army shone like Indra the lord of celestials.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then, Rama along with Sugreeva, together with the troop leaders of monkeys, ascended
the top of Suvela mountain which was having a circumference of sixteen miles.

Halting there just for a while and surveying the ten cardinal points, Rama saw the
city of Lanka, which was beautifully constructed by Visvakarma, the divine architect on the top of
Trikuta Mountain with nice arrangements and ravishing with enchanting groves.

There above a gateway, stood the invincible Ravana the lord of demons, who was being
fanned with white whisks on both sides, was graced with a triumphal parasol, was smeared with red
sandal paste, adorned with scarlet ornaments, attired in raiment embroidered in gold, resembling a
dark cloud, who bore on his breast scars of wounds inflicted on him by Airavata (the elephant who
carries Indra the Lord of celestials, on his back) with his tusks, wrapped in a cloak of red colour
resembling the colour of hare's blood and looked like a mass of clouds in the sky enveloped with
sunshine at sunset.

On seeing Ravana, Sugreeva got up all at once, while Rama and the chiefs of the army
of monkeys were looking on.

Gathering up his strength and courage, Sugreeva, in an impulse of fury, bounded from
the summit of the mountain and then sprang to the top of the gate (where Ravana was).

For a moment, he paused and then with a fearless soul, he saw that demon, whom he
regarded as a mere straw and thereafter spoke the following words harshly:

"O, demon! I am a friend and a servant of Rama, the Lord of the world. You will not
be spared by me today, by the inspiring grace of Rama."

Thus speaking, Sugreeva jumped up all at once, bounced over on ravana, pulled his
brightly coloured crown from his head and threw it away on the ground.

Seeing Sugreeva about to rush upon him again, Ravana spoke as follows: "You were
Sugreeva (one who has a handsome neck), when your were not present before my eyes. But now, you
will now become Hinagriva bereft of your neck."

Speaking thus, Ravana raised up and quickly flung Sugreeva to the ground with both
his arms. Bouncing like a ball, Sugreeva flung back his adversary with his arms.

Ravana and Sugreeva of great strength carried on a duel which was unbearable, with
perspiration broke out on their limbs, with their bodies red with blood, each clung to other other
paralyzing his opponent's movements resembling silk-cotton and Kimshuka trees, followed by blows of
fists, slaps of hands blows of elbows and blows of fingers on each other.

Having wrestled for a long time in the center of the flat floor of the gate way,
each in turn repeatedly lifting their bodies and bending their feet in a particular way, the two
highly swift combatants remained in that flat roof of the gate way.

Crushing one another and their bodies clung together, they both dropped down between
the defensive walls and the moat. They would leap up again, seizing each other from the ground,
after pausing an instant to regain their breath.

With arms interlaced like with ropes joined together, they remained locked together
in the struggle. Both of them, who had received training in wrestling and fully endowed with night,
were now moving to and fro in the arena.

The two heroes, who resembled a tiger and a a lion having their tusks growing or two
young lordly elephants encountening in a hostile manner, with arms interlaced and having duly tried
their strength, fell on the ground together.

Thereafter rising, those two heroes hurled themselves on each other, circling around
the arena again and again, like skilled and mighty wrestlers, nor were they easily fatigued.

Like unto great tuskers with their enormous arms resembling the trunks, those two
warriors were keeping back each other, fought vehemently for a long time and moved speedily in a
circular arena.

Approaching each other like tow wild cats fighting over a piece of meat trying to
kill each other, they stood growling again and again.

The two warriors, Sugreeva and Ravana, who were skilled in wrestling, excuted
innumerable and myraid evolutions, taking up diverse postures, moving in a curved line like an ox's
urine, coming and going, stepping side ways, having a retrograde motion to avoid blows, turning
about abandoning the attack, dashing towards each other, leaping, standing firm and erect,
retreated, turned sideways, rushed in a bent posture, ran lifting their foot to kick the opponent
and by letting go or stealing away.

Meanwhile, Ravana decided to common using his magic power. Knowing it, Sugreeva flew
into the sky triumphantly shaking off all fatigue, while Ravana, baffled by Sugreeva stood
confounded there alone.

Thus, the Lord of the monkeys, acquiring fame as a warrior, reducing Ravana to
exhaustion, ascended into the infinite sky and the offspring of the Sun then went to the side of
Rama, who as in the middle of the mokye-troops.

That Sugreeva, the offspring of the Sun, who was endowed with a speed of the wind,
having accomplished that feat there, increasing the military zeal of the foremost of Raghu dynasty,
honoured by the monkey leaders and delighted, rejoined the army.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seetha, who was overwhelmed with anguish on hearing Ravana's words, was comforted
and rendered happy by Sarama, as parched earth is solaced by rain.

Desiring to be of further service to her friend Seetha, the affectionate Sarama,
skilled in the knowledge of time, smiling while talking, spoke the following words at that
appropriate time.

"O, black eyed lady! I am capable of carrying a message of your words and good will
to Rama and to return secretly."

"When I am journeying in the sky self -supported, neither the god of wind nor Garuda
the eagle can follow my movement."

To Sarama, who was speaking as aforesaid, Seetha her voice no longer charged with
grief, gently and sweetly replied in the following words:

"You are capable of going to heaven or to the penultimate subterranean region. Know
from me today the duty that has got to be performed by you for my sake."

"If your intention is to act kindly towards me and your resolve is firm , I wish you
to go and know what Ravana is doing now."

"That cruel and evil minded Ravana, equipped with strength in the shape of conjuring
tricks, who makes his enemies cry has bemused me, as spirituous liquor bemuses one, the moment it
is imbibed."

"He causes me to be threatened by words all the time by the most frightful ogresses,
who always surround me and insult me by their act repeatedly."

"I am depressed in mind and distrustful. My mind is not in its natural state.
Staying in Ashoka grove, I am distressed because of his fear."

"Report to me, all that is decided by him during his talk going on with his
ministers about the matter of releasing me or keeping me captive. It will be of great service to
me."

The soft spoken Sarama, wiping her face, which got moist with tears, replied as
follows to Seetha who was speaking as aforesaid:

"If your opinion is like this, I shall go on that account, O, Seetha! Having grasped
the feeling of the enemies, I shall return O, Seetha!"

Speaking thus, Surama thereafter went to the vicinity of that demon and heard the
conversation of Ravana who was with his ministers.

Sarama, who knew how to investigate could hear the wicked Ravana's resolve and soon
returned to Ashoka grove.

Sarama, who entered the Ashoka grove, saw Seetha who looked like Lakshmi the goddess
of prosperity (and the wife of Vishnu); bereft of the lotus and waiting for her only.

Seetha affectionately embraced the kindly speaking Surama who returned there and
offered personally a seat to her.

"Sitting here comfortably, tell me about the real design of that cruel and wicked
Ravana"

When Seetha trembling with fear enquired thus, Sarama narrated all the conversation
of Ravana together with his ministers.

"Excellent words were spoken by Kaikasi, the mother of Ravana as well as Aviddha the
aged minister asking for your release, O Seetha!"

"Let Seetha, be restored honorably to Rama the Lord of men. That wonderful** thing
happened in Janasthana is an enough eye- opener to you."

"Which mortal would accomplish the crossing of the ocean, the discovery of Seetha by
Hanuman, and the carnage of the demons in combat on this earth?"

"Though admonished in many ways by the aged ministers and his mother he is not
inclined to set you free, any more than a miser would leave his hold on his riches.

"O, Seetha! He does not want to release you, without dying himself in a battle. This
is the resolve of the cruel Ravana along with his ministers."

-"Thereafter, due to infatuation caused by his impending death, his aforesaid
determination is very firm .He is not in a position to release you, not through sheer fear, but
until he is actually defeated in battle through the carnage of all the demons and of himself."

"O, dark eyed Seetha! Killing Ravana by his sharp arrows in combat, Rama will take
you back to Ayodhya by all means."

In the meantime was heard the sound of all the monkey troops blended with the sound
of kettle drums, causing earth to shake.

Hearing that sound of that monkey troops, the servants of Ravana stationed in Lanka
were lack- luster with their movements, overcome by depression. They did not see anything salutary
in it, owing to the fault of their king.
undefined
undefined
undefined

After speaking to him as aforesaid, Vibhishana taking Lakshmana, who held a bow in
his hand, felt rejoiced and hastened away.

Moving not very distant from there and entering an extensive thicket, Vibhishana
showed to Lakshmana, the place where Indrajit was going to pour oblations into the sacred fire.

The glorious Vibhishana showed a terribly looking banyan tree, appearing like a
blace cloud (and spoke as follows).

"After offering oblations to the spirits at this place, the mighty Indrajit proceeds
to the battle afterwards."

"Thereupon, this demon becomes invisible to any one, kills some enemies in battle
and binds some with his excellent arrows."

"Destroy that mighty Indrajit, along with his chariot, horses and charioteer, by
releasing your blazing arrows, even while he has not reached the banyan tree."

That greatly brilliant Lakshmana, a delight of his fiends, saying 'So be it' took
his stand there, twanging his bow at full length.

That Indrajit, the son of Ravana, clad in armour, armed with a sword, and
distinguished by his ensign, appeared in a fire-coloured chariot.

That highly splendid Lakshmana spoke to that Indrajit, the scion of Sage Paulastya,
who had never been conquered before (as follows); "I am inviting you for a fight. Give battle to me
in a right manner."

Thus spoken by Lakshmana, Indrajit with a great brilliance and high mindedness,
seeing Vibhishana there, spoke the following harsh words to him:

"O demon! You are born and brought up here. You are a direct brother to my father
and a paternal uncle to me. How can you be hostile to a son?

"O perverted fellow, an abuser of righteousness! Consanguinity is not a norm for
you, nor friendliness, nor pride of birth, nor a brotherly feeling nor a right conduct."

"O evil-minded one! You are pitiable and deserve to be reproached by the virtuous,
in that having abandoned your onw kind, you have entered into the service of our enemy."

"You are not recognizing the great difference because of your feeble mind. Where is
living together with one's own kindred and where is taking refuge with low kind of enemies?

"Opponents may be virtuous. One's own kindred may not be virtuous. But, a relation,
though bereft of merit is preferable. An enemy is, indeed, ever an enemy."

"He who, abandoning his own side, takes sides with adversary, is killed, after his
own knsmen are destroyed just by those people of the other side."

"O Indrajit, the demon! The ruthlessness thus shown by you and the manliness
exhibited by you (in bringing Lakshmana here) could be possible only by you, our own kindred."

Hearing the words of Indrajit, his brother's son, Vibhishana replied: "O demon! Why
do you speak perversely, as though you are not aware of my nature."

"O Indrajit the wicked one! Atleast out of respect for the elders, abandon your
harshness. Even if I am born in a demoniac race, which does cruel acts, my nature is goodness,
which is prime virtue of human beings and it is not demoniacal."

"I neither delight in cruel acts, nor rejoice in unvirtuous acts. How can a brother
be driven away by his brother, even if the former's nature is different?"

"Renouncing a man of sinful resolve hose conduct has deviated from righteousness,
one attains happiness, as one shakes off a venomous serpent from his hand."

"The wise men say that an evil-natured fellow, who is intent on taking away other's
property and lustfully touches another's wife, is worth shunning, as one abandons a house in
flames."

"Three faults produce destruction. Taking away other's property, lustfully touching
another's wife and excessive distrust with one's friends."

"These faults which destroy one's life and lordship killing great sages terribly,
waging war against all celestials, arrogance, becoming angry very easily, quarrelsomeness, ill-will
have concealed the good qualities of my elder brother, as the clouds conceal the view of
mountains."

"Because of these vices, Ravana, your father and my brother, has been abandoned by
me. Neither will this City of Lanka will exist any longer nor you nor your father."

"O demon! You can talk to me as you like, since you are arrogant, foolish,
indisciplined and caught, as you are, in the noose of Death."

"O the worst of demons! You got this calamity here because you spoke harsh words to
me today. You cannot reach the banyan-tree any longer."

"It is not possible for you to survive, on attacking Lakshmana. You fight with
Lakshmana, the lord of men, in the battle-field. After being killed, you will do sacred work in the
abode of Yama, the god of Death."

"Do spend away all your weapons and arrows, by showing your own augmented strength.
Reaching the range of Lakshmana's arrows, you will not indeed return alive with your army
today."
undefined
undefined
undefined

A valiant demon by name Prahasta, the commander-in-chief, appearing like a dark
cloud, joined his palms in salutation and spoke these words.

"All gods, demons, gandharvas, devils, birds and serpents can be attacked by you in
battle. Why to talk about two human beings?"

"All of us, in good faith but with negligence, were cheated by Hanuma. That monkey
cannot go alive, while I am alive."

"I shall make the entire earth extending upto the ocean, along with mountains
forests and woods, bereft of monkeys. You command me."

"Oh, Ravana! I shall arrange for your defence from that monkey. Not a little trouble
will come to you on account of your guilt (abduction of Seetha)."

A demon by name Durmukha, being seriously enraged, spoke to him as follows: "This
humiliation meted out to us by that monkey is indeed not to be tolerated."

"This insult to the city of Lanka and the palaces together with attack by Sugreeva
on the glorious Ravana are still outrageous."

"Proceeding at this moment alone, I shall destroy those monkeys, whether they
entered the ocean or the subterranean region or the sky."

Thereafter the very strong Vajradamshtra, beset with great anger, took hold of a
terrific iron club smeared with flesh and blood and spoke (as follows):

"What work for us with that pitiable and miserable Hanuma, when Rama along with
Lakshmana and Sugreeva who are difficult to be conquered exist?"

"Now itself, with this iron club, killing Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva after
perturbing the army of monkeys, I shall come back."

"Oh, king! If you are willing, hear my words further. One who is skilled din a
stratagem alone will be without lassitude and can indeed defeat the enemies."

O, king of demons! Thousands of demons able to change their form at will courageaous
appalling terrifying to look at and firm (in their purpose) can wear human body approach Rama
without embarrassment and all speak to Rama (as follows).

"We have been despatched by Bharata, your younger brother. He is summoning his
forces and will surely come here soon."

"Carrying spikes, javelins and maces together with arrows and swords in hand, we
will quickly go there from here soon."

"Standing as groups in the sky and beating that army of monkeys with a mighty hail
of stones and missiles, we should send them to the world of Death."

"If Rama and Lakshmana thus approach softly into our trap they will surely abandon
their lives as they are taken away by the trap."

Thereafter Kumbhakarna's son, by name Nikumbha, strong and powerful, became very
angry and spoke (as follows) to Ravana, who made people cry.

All of you stay along with the king. I alone will kill there, Rama along with
Lakshman, Sugreeva along with Hanuma and all the monkeys also.

Then, a demon by name Vajrahanu who was resembling a mountain, becoming enraged and
licking the corners of his mouth with his tongue, spoke as follows:

"You do your occupations freely redeemed of mental pain, play comfortably and drink
spirituous liquor without any worry. I alone will devour the entire army of monkeys."

At this time I alone will kill Sugreeva along with Lakshmana Hanuma along with
Angada and all monkeys.
undefined
undefined
undefined

After listening to Sarana's words Shuka, pointing out all that army of monkeys,
spoke the following words to Ravana the Lord of Demons.

"O, king! Do you observe those monkeys resembling huge elephants in rut, rising like
banyan trees on the banks of River Ganga or Sala trees on Himalayas? Those warriors, able to change
their form at will, are irresistible, equal to celestials and demons, and in a battle, are endowed
with the valour of the gods."

"There are twenty one thousand crores, a thousand Shankus and a hundred Vrindas of
these monkeys."

"These monkeys, the attendants of Sugreeva born of celestials and celestial
musicians, are able to change their form at will and always stay in Kishkindha."

"The two who stand there, who have the same resemblance and have the appearance of
celestials, are Mainda and Dvivida. None can equal them in combat."

"These two, who ate ambrosion on due authorization by Brahma, are hopefully of
destroying Lanka by their power."

"As for that monkey who you see there, resembling an intoxicated elephant, who in
strength and fury is able to churn up the ocean itself, it is he who came to Lanka to find Seetha
and spy on you, O, Lord! See that monkey, who was seen earlier and who appears here again."

"This monkey, by whom the ocean was traversed, is the eldest son of Kesari. He is
known as the son of wind-god and famously called as Hanuman."

"This excellent monkey can assume any form at will. He is endowed with a good
strength and form always moving like the wind-god, having an uninterrupted mobility."

"While yet a child, seeing the sun rise, he desired to eat it and took off to a
distance of three thousand yojanas (or twenty four thousand miles) reflecting: �I shall seize hold
of the sun and my hunger will not be appeased otherwise' and they say, he leapt up (into the air)
intoxicated as he was with his own strength."

"Without even reaching the sun, which is most unassailable even to celestials, sages
or demons, he however fell on a mountain, where that radiant orb rises."

"One of the jaws of this monkey who fell down on the head of the rock, was a little
fractured. For this reason, because of his strong jaw, he is called Hanuma."

"This monkey is known to me actually through the words of my bosom friends. It is
not possible to describe his strength or physical form or glory."

"He alone wants to destroy Lanka by his valour. How do you forget this monkey by
whom this fire was lighted and is still blazing up Lanka."

"Nearby is a warrior, dark of hue with eyes like lotuses, a chief warrior among
Ikshvakus, his heroism is well-known in the world, his sense of duty never wavers, nor does he ever
transgress the righteousness, he knows to loose Brahma's weapon and is conversant with Veda, he is
the most learned of the Vedic scholars, he shatters the firmament with his arrows, and rends even
the earth, his anger is akin to that of Death, his valour equal to that of Indra the god of
celestials, his consort is Seetha who was taken away by you from a place called Janasthana, he is
Rama who has come to wage war on you, O king!"

"This man, having the radiance of pure gold, with a broad chest, having red eyes,
with black and curled hair, standing at the right side of Rama, he is called Lakshmana, who is
interested in the care and welfare of his brother, skilled in leadership of combat and excellent
among the wielders of all weapons."

This Lakshmana is an angry person, difficult to be conquered, victorious, wise and
mighty. He has always been the right arm of Rama and in outward moving life (of Rama).

"He does not indeed care for his life in the cause of Rama. He alone wishes to kill
all the demons in battle."

"He who is standing there, taking guard at the left side of Rama, surrounded by a
troop of demons he is the king Vibhishana."

"He, who was consecrated as a king for Lanka by the illustrious Rama, the king of
kings, is enraged really with you and is to attack us in the battle."

"The other whom you see as an unshakable mountain and standing in the centre of
monkeys as a Lord of all chiefs of monkeys, with a boundless energy and who, like a Himalayan hill,
very much radiating the other monkeys by his splendour, glory, wisdom, strength and his noble
descent, who occupies along with the chiefs of Army Generals, a secret place called Kishkindha,
with its forests and trees and the place inaccessible because of its impassable mountains, in which
is established a good fortune of celestials and human beings, whose charming and golden coloured
garland with hundred lotuses is beautifying, that person is Sugreeva. This garland along with a
lady called Tara as well as the permanent kingdom of monkeys were presented to him by Rama after
having killed Vali (Sugreeva's brother)."

"Wise men call a hundred lakhs as a crore. A hundred thousand crores is reckoned as
a Shanku."

"A hundred thousand Shankus are said to be one Maha Shanku. A hundred thousand Maha
Shankus are called one Vrindam here. A hundred thousand Vrindas are said to be one Maha vrindam. A
hundred thousand Mahavrindas are called one Padmam here. A hundred thousand padmas are said to be
one Mahapadmam. A hundred thousand Mahapadmas are called one Kharvam here. A hundred thousand
kharvas are said to be one Mahakharvam. A hundred thousand Mahakharvas are called one Samundram. A
hundred thousand Samudras are said to be one ogha here. A hundred thousand oghas are acclaimed a
one Mahaugha."

"This Sugreeva, the king of monkeys, having great strength and valour, always
surrounded by a colossal army, is approaching you to make war, accompanied by the valiant
Vibhishana and the ministers, as also a hundred thousand crores of Shankas, a thousand Mahashankus,
a hundred Vrindas, a thousand mahavrindas, a hundred padmas, a thousand Mahapadmas, a hundred
kharves, samudras and Mahaughas of the same number, and a crore of Mahanghas wholearmy as such is
identical of an ocean."

"O, king! Carefully observing this army, which appears much the same as a blazing
planet, prepare yourself for a great effort to get victory and take measures to avoid defeat from
the enemies."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Thereafter the inviolable Rama who possesses sacred knowledge, after hearing
Hanuman's words, spoke with a clear understanding, the following opinion that was firm in his
mind:

"I also wish to tell my opinion about Vibhishana. I want it to be heard by you, who
are firmly established in our welfare."

"By any means, I do not desert anyone who arrives with a friendly appearance, even
if he has a defect. His acceptance is irreproachable in the eyes of good men"

Then, Sugreeva the chief of monkeys closely analyzed and examined the aforesaid
words of Rama and thereafter spoke the following most auspicious words:

"What matters if this ranger of night is very dangerous or other wise, if he can
desert his own brother at a time of peril? Whom will he not betray subsequently?"

Hearing the words of Sugreeva, Rama who was truly mighty looked round all of them ,
smiled a little and spoke the following words to Lakshmana, of virtuous characteristics:

"Without studying scriptures and without serving elders, it is not possible to speak
such words as Sugreeva spoke."

"It appears to my mind that there is however something peculiar in these
circumstances which are clearly to be seen in all lives of kings and even occurring in ordinary
life."

"It is told that persons of the same family and rulers belonging to adjoining
territories become enemies and strike in times of adversities. For this reason, he came here."

"Even if belonging to the same family, persons who are virtuous do respect their own
well wishers in that family. Generally among kings, even a virtuous person is apprehended."

"With regard to the draw back you told me in the matter of accepting a person coming
from the side of an adversary, hear from me what the scriptures say."

"We do not belong to the same family. Further, Vibhishana the demon is desirous of
acquiring the kingdom. A few of the demons also may be rather learned ones. That is why, Vibhishana
is acceptable."

"Kinsfolk do not live together in a fearless mode and in a delightful manner. Hence,
they get a split among themselves. For this reason, a fear has come to him. This loud appeal is
also major cause. That is why, Vibhishana can be accepted."

"My dear one! Neither all brothers are like Bharata, nor all sons of a father like
me nor all friends are like you."

Hearing Rama's words Sugreeva who was together with the highly wise Lakshmana stood
up saluting and spoke these words:

"O, Rama the excellent among the tolerant! Realise that Ravana has sent Vibhishana,
the demon. I think of him to be worthy of being taken as a captive."

"O, the mighty armed Rama! The faultless one! This demon is being sent to kill you
who are unsuspecting, or to kill Lakshmana or me in trust. He came here with a crooked mind. He
with his counselors is fit to be imprisoned. Is not Vibhishana the brother of cruel Ravana?"

Speaking thus to Rama, the best of Raghu dynasty, Sugreeva who knew the mode of
expression, thereafter kept silent.

Hearing those words of Sugreeva, Rama pondered over the words and thereafter spoke
more auspicious words to Sugreeva as follows:

"What does it matter whether that demon is very bad or not bad? He is incapable of
doing even a little harm to me."

"O, Sugreeva, Lord of monkey-troops! If I wish, I can kill those devilish beings,
demons, supernatural beings and ogres living on earth with just a tip of my finger"

"It is narrated how by a dove, its enemy ( a fowler) when it came for a refuge, was
received according to rules of hospitality and was invited for a feast with its own flesh."

"O, the excellent of monkeys! The aforesaid dove indeed accepted as a guest, the
fowler as he came, although he killed its wife .How much more a man like me has to do?"

"Hear the verses inculcating virtue so long ago, by Kandu, the son of a sage called
Kanva, a great sage and a speaker of truth."

"O, king the terminator of enemies! Even an enemy, who formed a cup with his
hollowed hands, a miserable person, a person who is begging and who is seeking a refuge should not
be killed with the aim of not being cruel."

"An enemy who comes for protection against others, even if the aforesaid enemy is
oppressed or arrogant, is to be protected by one who has a disciplined mind, even by abandoning
one's life."

"If he does not protect rightly through his strength, by fear or by ignorance or by
desire, it is a sin to be reproached by the world."

"If having not been protected, a refugee dies before the eyes of a man who is able
to protect him, the former takes along all his moral merit and goes."

"In not protecting thus the persons who take refuge, there is a great blemish
involved in it. It does not bestow heaven. It destroys reputation. It devastates strength and
valor"

"I will follow the excellent words of Kandu. It becomes a very righteous thing,
gives reputation, leads to heaven and the rewards appear consequently."

"He who seeks refuge in me just once, telling me that �I am yours', I shall give him
assurance of safety against all types of beings. This is my solemn pledge"

"O, Sugreeva, the chief of monkeys! Let him either be Vibhishana or even Ravana
himself; I have given an assurance of safety to him. Bring him here."

Hearing Rama' s words, Sugreeva the lord of monkeys, overwhelmed as he was with
cordial friendship, replied to Rama as follows:

"O, Rama, who knows righteousness, the crest jewel among lords of the world! What
surprise is there in thinking that you, duly endowed with true essence of life and established in a
right path, speak these venerable words?"

"My inmost spirit also feels Vibhishana to be a genuine person, he being well
examined from all angles, by act of inference and by his appearance."

"O, Rama! Hence, let the highly wise Vibhishana be equal among us soon together. Let
him get our friendship too"

Hearing those words of Sugreeva, Rama the king of men, as acknowledged by Sugreeva,
held meeting with Vibhishana, as Indra the lord of celestials once met Garuda the king of
birds.

Thus, this is the 18th chapter in Yuddha Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana, the First Epic poem of India.
<br>

undefined
undefined
undefined

The mighty armed Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities sallied forth with the
resonant roll of kettle drums, mingled with the blast of couches.

Hearing that sound, Ravana the Lord of demons, paused for a moment to reflect and
looked towards his ministers.

Ravana of great strength the tormentor of the world, and a cruel lord of demons then
addressed all his ministers in a voice that resounded the entire hall as follows, accusing
none.

"I have heard what you told me about Rama's crossing the ocean, his prowess,
strength and heroism."

"I know that you are truly brave in the battle-field, yet, on beholding that valiant
Rama, you too look on each other in silence."

Hearing those word of Ravana whose maternal grandfather he was, the highly
intelligent demon called Malyavan, answered him thus:

"O, king! He who is well-versed in (fourteen)* sciences and follows the path of
prudence, enjoys sovereignty for a long time and compels his enemies too into subjugation."

"He who concludes peace even with enemies or wages war at a fitting time strengthens
his own party and attains a great power."

"A treaty of peace should be reached by a king who is weaker or equal to an enemy.
The king should never underrate that enemy. If the king is more powerful, he should make war on the
enemy."

"O, Ravana! For that reason, alliance with Rama finds favour with me. Let Seetha,
for whose sake you are being attacked, be restored to him."

"All the celestials, sages and Gandharvas the celestial musicians are wishing for
victory of Rama. Do not get an enmity with them. Let alliance with him be acceptable to you."

"Brahma, the lord of creation, created only two classes of beings, the celestials
and the demons. Celestials take refuge in righteousness and demons in unrighteousness."

"O, Ravana! Righteous is said to be on the side of the high-souled celestials.
Unrighteousness is indeed on the side of ogres and demons."

"When righteousness swallows unrighteousness, it becomes kR^ita Yuga, a golden age.
When unrighteousness swallows righteousness, it incites Kali Yuga the fourth age."

"Therefore, while you were wandering in the worlds, even the great righteousness was
destroyed and unrighteousness favoured by you. So, the enemies are stronger than us."

"Due to your negligence, that well nourished unrighteousness is swallowing us. Being
favourable to demons, the sect of demons is thereby getting augmented."

"You, who are interested in sensual enjoyments, doing whatever you like, have
created a great alarm in the sages, having the nature of fire."

"The power of those sages is insurmountable like an igniting fire. Having purified
their minds through penance, they are intent on promotion of righteousness, in as much as these
Brahamans worship the gods through different principal sacrifices, also pour oblations into the
sacred fires with due ceremony and read the Vedas (Sacred texts) in a loud voice. Having subdued
the demons, they continued to chant the sacred text, on hearing which all the demons scattered in
all directions, as thundering clouds in a hot season."

"The smoke coming forth from the sacred fire of the sage who resemble the fire (in
brilliance), enveloping the ten directions, takes away the magical power of the demons."

"The severe austerity practised by the sages, firm of resolve, in different
countries torment the demons."

"You received a boon of invincibility from celestials, demons and semi-divine
beings, but then are men, bears as well as powerful and very efficacious having strong prowess who
are coming hither, roaring like lions."

"By seeing various kinds of unexpected events (portents) and many types of terrific
things, I am perceiving a destruction of all the demons."

"With terrifying clamour, monstrous clouds, inspiring horror, rain hot blood on
Lanka on every side."

"Drops of tears drop from the weeping elephants, horses etc., whose skins became
discoloured, covered with dust and are not shining as before."

"Flesh-eating animals, jackals and eagles and howling horribly. Entering Lanka, they
are in the groves, forming into groups."

"Black women, chattering incoherently in dreams and robbing different houses stand
in front, laughing loudly with their white teeth."

"Dogs devour the sacred offerings offered in homes. Donkeys are born of cows and
rats of mongoose."

"Cats mate with tigers, pigs with dogs, Kinnaras (a species of demi-gods with the
human figure and the head of a horse or with a horse's body and the head of a man) with demons and
men."

"Red-footed and white pigeons, messengers of death, move in different directions,
foretelling the extermination of demons."

"Domesticated minas (a kind of birds) making a chirping sound, defeated by other
bellicose birds drop down, being twined together in groups."

"Birds and wild animals, facing towards the sun, cry out. Death, in the form of a
frightful, monstrous and cruel blackish fellow with a shaven head casts his eyes on all our
dwellings, both morning and evening. These and such other sinister omens appear."

"I deem Rama of firm fortitude as Vishnu dwelling in human form. This Rama is not a
mere human being, he by whom that most wonderful bridge was built across the sea. O, Ravana!
Conclude peace with Rama, who is the king of men. Having come to know of his acts, let that which
is good for the future be done after a mature understanding."

Having spoken thus, the mighty Malyavan, who was foremost in valour among the
bravest warriors, being aware of what was passing in Ravana's mind, eyeing him, became silent.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then, Ravana an eminent person in the assembly, having seen all that gathering,
instructed Prahasta the chief of his army (as follows):

"O, commander! You are allowed to issue an order to see that well-trained warriors
belonging to the four divisions of the army (viz.cavalry, infantry, chariots and elephants) are
entrusted with the defense of the city."

Prahasta, resolute in his mind to follow the king's orders stationed the whole army
both outside as well as inside the city.

Thereafter, Prahasta after keeping the whole army in defence of the city, sat in
front of the king and spoke (as follows):

Your army, as strong as you are, has been positioned both outside and inside the
city. Pray do quickly, with an undistracted mind, whatever is preferable to you."

Hearing the words of Prahasta, who wished the welfare of the kingdom, king Ravana,
with a desire to obtain happiness, spoke in the desire midst of his friends as follows:

When you are in difficult situations regarding virtue pleasure and wealth, you are
able to have a correct notion of pleasant and unpleasant things, happiness and sorrow, gain and
detriment as well as advantages and disadvantages."

"All of my works undertaken by you with an act of attention, were never in
vain."

"I will obtain maximum prosperity, while abiding with you, as Indra obtains
properity while abiding with moon, planets, stars and celestials."

"I am intent on reminding all of you again. But I could not inform this matter
earlier to Kumbhakarna because of his sleep."

"This most powerful Kumbhakarna, the chief among all the wielders of weapons, was
indeed sleeping for the last six months and now, he woke up."

"Seetha the beloved wife of Rama was brought from the forest of Dandaka, the place
frequented by demons."

Seetha of languid pace, does not like to reach my bed. I do not imagine any other
woman similar to Seetha existing in the three worlds."

"She has a slim waist, well-developed hips, and a face similar to an autumnal moon.
Looking like an idol of gold and being placid She appears like an illusory image created by
Maya.

"Seeing Her feet with rose-coloured soles, smooth and evenly resting on ground with
the rosy soles, my lust is kindled."

"Seeing her countenance similar to the flame of a sacrificial fire and looking like
the radiance of the sun, with her prominent nose and the pretty clear and handsome eyes, I became
unrestrained, having submitted to the will of my passion."

"I have been polluted by lust and equally by anger and pleasure thus making me pale
and I have been ever since in grief and anguish."

"Looking forward Rama, her husband, that longish large eyed Seetha, requested me to
give time for one year. I accepted the auspicious words of the charmingly eyed Seetha. I am wearied
of this lust, like a horse galloping along a path continuously."

How the monkeys or even Rama and Lakshmana can cross the unassailable ocean,
completely infested as it was with sea-animals?"

"on the other hand, a huge destruction was done to us, by a single monkey. The
consequences of their acts are unpredictable. Tell me what is there in your mind, according to your
own understanding."

"We have no fear with human beings. Even so, the matter can be discussed. Earlier,
together with you, I conquered the celestials in a battle between the celestials and demons. You
also conquered them. Knowing the whereabouts of Seetha, Rama and Lakshmana together with Sugreeva
and other monkeys reached the other shore of the ocean."

"Let a consultation be held by you and a judicious line of course suggested, so that
Seetha may not have to be handed -over to them back and Rama and Lakshmana may be killed."

"I do not see any other's capability to cross the ocean even so with the monkeys.
Victory is surely mine."

Hearing the lamentation of Ravana who was captivated by lust, Kumbhakarana became
angry and spoke the following words:

"You should have contemplated thoroughly that very moment when Seetha was brought
here forcibly only after a single impulsive thought from the hermitage of Rama, who was accompanied
by Lakshmana, even like the river Yamuna fills the depression at its source the moment it descends
on earth."

"O, emperor! If all this act of consultation with us was done at the beginning of
this action itself (of bringing Seetha here), it would have been worthy of you."

"O, Ravana! A king who performs king's functions with a mind duly ascertained by
justice, will not repent thereafter."

"Actions done pervertedly without use of any stratagem get spoiled, even as
oblations not intent on devotion got spoiled.

"He who is not aware of prudence and imprudence, wants to do actions which are to be
done before at a later stage and actions which are to be done later at a stage before."

"Seeing superior strength in a hasteful enemy, some look for his weak point, even as
swans seek the cleavage in the Kraunca mountain."

"This great act was undertaken by you without proper thinking. By good fortune, Rama
did not kill you even as the meat mixed with poison would kill the consumer."

"O, irreproachable brother! Therefore by killing your enemies, I shall neutralize
the dishonourable act undertaken by you in relation to your enemies."

"O, ranger of night! I shall destroy your enemies. I shall do battle with the two
brothers, even if they are Indra and the sun-god or the god of fire and the wind-god or Kubera (the
god of riches) and Varuna (the god of water).

"Entering the combat with a mountain-sized body and fiery teeth, roaring the while
and attacking with an immense bludgeon, I shall strike terror in Indra himself!"

"Even before Rama strikes me once more with a second arrow, I shall drink his blood.
Cheer up freely.

"I shall try to fetch victory, which brings pleasure to you, by the killing of Rama.
By exterminating Rama along with Lakshmana, I shall devour all the leaders of monkey-troops."

"Enjoy yourself freely. Drink excellent of wines to the extent of your desire
without any anxiety. Rama, having been dispatched by me to the abode of death, Seetha will be at
your disposal forever."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Meanwhile, Rama the king of men and Sugreeva the Sovereign of monkeys, Hanuman the
son of the wind, Jambavan the king of the Bears, Vibhishana the demon, Angada the son of Vali,
Lakshmana, Sushena along with his kinsfolk, Mainda, Dvivida, Gaja, Gavaksha, Kumuda, Nala and
Panasa, all having reached the enemy's territory, assembled to take counsel together.

"Observe this city of Lanka, ruled by Ravana, impregnable both to celestials and the
demons together, or the uragas (the serpent-demons) and Gandharvas (celestial musicians)."

"Ravana, the lord of demons always stays in the City. Think of the ways and means
for the success of our expedition."

While they were talking thus, Vibhishana the younger brother of Ravana spoke the
following meaningful and polished words:

"My counsellors named Anala, Panasa, Sampati and Pramati went to the City of Lanka
and returned here."

"Assuming the form of birds, all the four entered that enemy's citadel and observed
the measures taken by Ravana closely."

"O, Rama! I give a detailed report as it was given to me of the defence-arrangements
made by tha evil-minded Ravana, hear me."

"The very strong Prashata is standing near the eastern gate. Mahaparshva and
Mahodara of mighty prowess are at the southern gate."

"Indragit, the son of Ravana is at the western gate along with many demons armed
with harpoons, swords, bows, spears and hammers together with warriors furnished with weapons of
various kinds."

"A prey to great anxiety, Ravana knower of magical formulas, is himself stationed at
the northern gate, along with several thousands of demons holding lances in their hand."

"As for Virupaksha he with mighty army carrying spears, clubs and bows along with
other demons, occupies the center of the fort."

"All these counsellors of mine watched those groups of troops arranged in Lanka in
this manner and immediately returned here."

"The elephants and chariots number some ten thousand each, the cavalry twenty
thousand and there are more than a crore foot soldiers. These strong and intrepid demons
endeavouring to kill someone in battle have ever been their sovereign's favourites."

"O, Rama! In these demons, a retinue of ten lacs each is near at hand for each
demon."

The mighty armed Vibhishana showed those counsellors to Rama after reporting the
aforesaid news pertaining to Lanka, thus informed by his counsellors.

The counsellors of Vibhishana themselves confirmed all that was known regarding
Lanka. Thereafter, the illustrious Vibhishana, in his desire to please Rama, addressed that
lotus-eyed one, further with the following words:

"O, Rama! When Ravana attacked Kubera in battle, sixty lacs of demons sallied forth
with him. All of them were akin to the evil-minded Ravana in prowess, in strength, in courage and
in pride."

"Indignation need not be resorted to (by you) based on this report. I am not
terrifying you, bt only arousing your wrath. You are indeed capable of overpowering even celestials
by your valour."

"Having set out these monkey-forces in battle-array, you shall destryoy Ravana with
this great army of monkeys, composed of four divisions, which surround you."

Vibhishana having spoken thus Rama gave the following orders for the attack of the
adversaries.

"At the eastern gate of Lanka, Nila that lion among monkeys for his part, surrounded
by many monkeys, should attack Prahasta."

"At the southern gate, Angada the son of Vali, surrounded by his mighty army, should
oppose Mahaparshva and Mahodara."

"Let Hanuman that son of the Wind and of inscrutable spirit, surrounded by a
multitude of monkeys, enter the City through the western gate."

I am myself determined to slay that wicked who owing to the boon he has received,
enjoys oppressing multitudes of Daityas (gaints) and Daanavas (demons), as also the magnanimous
sages and who ranges the world, persenting all being. With the aid of Lakshmana, I shall forcibly
enter the northern gate where Ravana is stationed along with his army."

"Let the mighty Sugreeva the king of monkeys, the valiant Jambavan the king of bears
and Vibhishana, the younger brother of the Lord of demons occupy the central position of the
army."

"Monkeys should not assume human form in the battle, for, in the army of monkeys,
this monkey-shape should serve as a sign of recognition among us."

"Among our own people also, the form of monkeys will become a sign of recognition
for us. Seven of us will attack the foe in our human form, I, my brother Lakshmana, who is full of
valour, my friend Vibhishana and his four companions."

Having said thus to Vibhishana for the success of the enterprise, Rama in the role
of a wise leader, decided to stay on Mount Suvela, after observing its charming slopes.

Thereafter, having covered the entire filed with his great army and having made up
his mind to destroy the enemies, that high-souled Rama of great courage, set out for Lanka with a
joyous and exultant air.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Having taken his bow, Rama of great brilliance and prowess, then beheld the bulky
Kumbhakarna, adorned with a diadem.

Seeing that paramount demon, whose appearance was in the form of a mountain and
looking like Lord Narayana (the son of the original Man); taking strides across space, (manifested
in the form of Trivikrama, who measured the whole universe in a couple of strides) Rama became
vigilant.

Beholding him again, who was appear like a rainy black cloud and wearing a golden
bracelet as an ornament on his upper arm, that huge army of monkeys took to their heels in full
speed.

Seeing the army running away and the demon increasing his body, Rama with a
surprise, spoke to vibhishana as follows:

"This eminent demon, appearing as a mountain, with a diadem and tawmy eyes and
looking like a cloud with a flash of lightning, is seen in Lanka. Who is he?"

"He alone with a huge body here on this earth, is appearing like a solitary meteror,
by seeing whom all the monkeys are running away hither and thither."

"Who is he with such a colossal body? Tell me whether he is a demon or an evil
spirit. I have not seen such a creature earlier at any time."

Thus asked by Rama the prince, who was unweary in action, the highly intelligent
Vibhishana replied to Rama as follows:

"He is the powerful Kumbhakarna, the son of Visravasa. He conquered Yama and Indra
in battle. Tehre is no other demon, corresponding to the size of his body."

"O Rama! He conquered thousands of celestials, demons, a class of demi-gods, serpent
demons, ogres, Gandharvas teh celestial musicians, Vidyadharas the celestials artistes and Kinnaras
(the semi-divine beings with the human form and the head of a horse) in battle."

"Seeing the mighty Kumbharana with ghastly eyes and a spear in hand, the celestials
were not able to kill him, having confused to think that he was yama the god of Death."

"This Kumbhakarna, by his very nature, is energetic and mighty. The strength of the
other demon-chiefs is attributable to boons (granted on request by gods)."

"Soon after his birth, this great-souled demon, afflicted as he was by hunger, ate
thousands of living creatures."

"While the living being were being eaten, the frightened people sought refuge with
Indra and even reported the matter about him."

That Mahendra wielding a thunder-bolt was enraged and struck Kumbhakarna with his
weapon of the white thunderbolt. The great souled Kumbhakarna struck by Indra's thunderbolt was
quite agitatated at it and roared loudly with anger."

"Hearing the roar of that Kumbakarna, the demon, wh was howling loudly, the
grigthened people were further frightened."

"Enraged as he was on Mahendra, the mighty Kumbhakarna then pulled out a tusk of
Airavata, Indra's elephant and struck it into Indra's chest."

"That Devendra, tormented by the hit of Kumbhakarna, was burning with rage. The
celestials, Brahmanical sages and demons were suddenly aggrieved. Even Indra with his people went
to the abode of Brahma the Lord of creation."

"They informed about the evil-mind of Kumbhakarna to Brahma, how he devoured the
living creatures, his assault on celestials, the destroyal of hermitages and his taking away of
others' wives."

"If he eats away the created beings continuously like this, the world will become
desolate just soon after some time."

"On hearing the words of Indra, Brahama, the great grandfather of the entire world,
called for the demons and saw Kumbhakarna too along with them."

"Just on seeing Kumbhakarna even Brahma was frightened. Thereafter on restoring his
confidence, Brahma cursed Kumbhakarna as follows:

"It is sure that you were created by visravasa for the destroyal of people. On that
account, you will be sleeping apparently dead from now onwards."

"Humbled by Brahma's curse, Kumbhakarna then fell down in front of Ravana.
Thereupon, the highly perplexed Ravana spoke the following words:"

"'O Brahma! You are cutting off a well-grown golden tree, just at the time of
yielding its fruit. It is not fair on your part to curse your own great grandson like this."

"Your words can never prove to be in vain. There is no doubt about it. He will have
to sleep certainly. Let some space of time be fixed for his sleeping and waking."

"Hearing the words of Ravana, Brahma spoke as follows: He will indeed sleep for six
months and wake-up for a day."

"On that single day, this male demon, having starved for six months, will wander
over the earth and eat the human race with his month wide open, like an augmented fire."

"Ravana, the king of demons, who got into an evil plight and frightened as he was in
seeing your prowess, now got Kumbhakarna awakened."

"This Kumbhakarna the male-demon with a terrific prowess started his tent. The
highly enraged Kumbhakara devourincg the monkeys on is way, is running towards us."

"Even on merely seeing Kumbhakarna, the monkeys have now fled away. How can the
monkeys check him, who is thus enraged in battle?"

"Let all the monkeys be told that it is a kind of machine, advancing forward. By
knowing this, they can become fearless by now."

On hearing Vibhishana's words, which were well-founded to make the monkeys
well-inclined to fight the battle, Rama then spoke the follwoing words to neela, the chief of
army:

"O Neela the son of fire-god. Go, marshalling the entire army. Occupying the
door-ways, high-ways and bridges of Lanka, stand ready for operation."

"Draw together the mountain-tops, trees and even the rocks. Let all the monkeys with
their weapons and rocks in hand, stand ready."

As directed by Raghavana, Neela the commander-in-chief and the foremost of the
monkeys, ordered the monkey-troops suitably.

Then, Gavaksha, Sharabha, Hanuma and Angada looking like mountains, reached the
gate, taking the mountian-tops.

On hearing Rama's words, the fearless monkeys started their operation. The heroic
monkeys began to torment the enemy-troops with uplifted trees.

That terrific army of monkeys, with uplifted rocks and tress in their hands, shone
like a big collection of gigantic clouds, hanging close to a mountain.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Guessing the mind of that great-souled Rama, Indrajit turning away from that battle,
entered the City.

Then, recalling the killing of those energetic demons like Kumbhakarna and others,
that valiant Indrajit sallied forth (for the fight) with red-hot eyes in anger.

That Indrajit, of very great prowess, the adversary of gods and who was born in Sage
Pulstya's dynasty, accompanied by an army of demons, came forth from the western gate.

Seeing the two valiant brothers, Rama and Lakshamana, who were prepared for the
encounter, Indrajit for his part, then started to demonstrate his conjuring tricks.

Placing an illusory image of Seetha on his chariot and a large army surrounding the
chariot, Indrajit intended to kill her.

Making up his mind to purposefully confuse all, by playing a trick to kill Seetha's
illusory image, the exceedingly evil-minded Indrajit sallied forth towards the direction of the
monkeys.

Seeing him coming forth towards their direction, all those monkeys were enraged and
bounced towards him, with rocks in their hands and with an intent to fight.

Hanuma, the foremost among the monkeys, taking hold of a very large mountain-peak,
which was difficult to be reached by others, marched in front.

That Hanuma saw Seetha, the wife of Rama, the best among women, bereft of joy,
wearing only a single braid of hair, looking miserable, with her face emaciated due to fasting,
dressed in a single worn-out clothing, unadorned and with all her limbs covered with dust and dirt;
in the chaiot of Indrajit.

On seeing her for a moment, Hanuma ascertained her as Seetha and became dejected.
That Seetha was indeed seen by him, not long ago.

Seeing her stricken with grief bereft of joy, looking distreseed, miserable and
sitting under the sway of Indrajit, Hanuma wondered as to what his intention might be. Thus
thinking, he along with those leaders of mnkeys, rushed towards Indrajit.

Beholding that army of monkeys, Indrajit was excited with anger, pulled Seetha by
the hair on her head and unsheathed his sword.

While those monkeys were seeing, demon began to strike that woman who was placed in
the chariot by the dint of his conjuring trick and who was crying "Rama! Rama!"

On seeing her seized by the hair Hanuma the son of wind-god was confounded with
affliction and shed tears, in agony from his eyes.

On seeing Seetha with all her charming limbs, the beloved wife of Rama, Hanuma
angrily addressed the foolowing harsh words to Indrajit:

"O evil minded one! Born in a dynasty of Brahmanical sages, but belonging to
demoniacal race, you touched a lock of her hair, for your hair, for your own ruin."

"O cruel, vulgar and mean fellow! O wicked demon of sinful prowess! O pitiless
fellow! Woe be to you, of sinful conduct, in whom such a resolve has taken place. Such an act is
worthy of a barbarian. There is no pity in you."

"O pitiless one! Seetha came away from her house, from her kingdom and from her
huband's (Rama's) protection. What wrong has Seetha done to you, that you are killing her?"

"By killing Seetha, you will not survivie for long in any way. O demon, desrving of
death! By your act, you indeed fell into my hands."

"Abandoning your life in this world, you shall, after death, descend to those worlds
which are the lot of the killers of women and are condemned even by those who deserved to be killed
by the people."

Thus speaking, Hanuma surrounded as he was by monkeys with their weapons and very
much enraged, rushed headlong towards Indrajit.

The army of demons of terrible rage intercepted that army of mokeys possessing a
high prowess and advancing towards them.

Stirring up that army of mokeys with a multitude of his arrows, Indrajit replied to
Hanuma, the foremost of mokeys as follows:

"For whose sake, Sugreeva, yourself and Rama came here, I am going to kill Seetha
now itself, while you stand looking on."

"O monkey! After killing her, I will make a short work of Rama, Lakshmana, yourself
too, Sugreeva and that vulgar Vibhishana thereafter."

"O monkey! What you have said just now viz. that women are not to be killed, is
correct. But that which causes tormentation to the enemies indeed needs to be done."

Having spoken thus to Hanuma, Indrajit personally killed that illusory Seetha, who
ahd been sobbing all the while, with his sharp-edged sword.

Split asunder by him diagonally, that miserable lady of broad hips and pleasant to
the sight, fell down on the ground.

After killing that woman, Indrajit told Hanuma as follows: "See, I killed Rama's
wife with my weapon. This Seetha is dead and all your labour is in vain."

After killing her with a large sword personally, that Indrajit then sitting on his
chariot, pleasurefully roared loudly.

The monkeys standing in vicinity heard his roar, even as he shouted with his mouth
wide open, while comfortable sitting in that tower of the aerial chriot, which was actually
difficult of access for others.

After killing Seetha in that way, the evil-minded Indrajit became exceedingly glad.
Seeing him exceedingly pleased, the monkeys looked dejected and suddenly ran away.
undefined
undefined
undefined

While those monkeys and demons were fighting, the sun sank below the horizon,
setting in motion a night of carnage.

Then, a nocturnal was commenced between the terrific monkeys and demons, who
contracted hostility with each other, wishing for their victory.

"You are a demon" said the monkeys "You are a monkey" said the demons and killed at
each other in battle; during that dreadful darkness.

"Strike!" "Tear asunder!" "come near!" "Why are you running away?" - very tumultuous
sounds like this could be heard in that army.

The black demons in that darkness, wearing golden mails, were appearing as mountains
with groves of medicinal plants emitting their light.

In that darkness, which was difficult to be overcome, the demons agitated as they
were with anger, attacked with great speed, duly destroying the monkeys.

Those strong monkeys with a terrific rage leapt forward and tore asunder by their
sharp teeth, the steeds with gold ornaments on their head, the serpentine banners and frightened
the demoniac army.

Agitated with anger, the monkeys dragged the elephants and those mounted on them and
also the chariots with their banners and flag-staffs duly breaking them to pieces with their
teeth.

Rama and Lakshmana killed the foremost of the demons, both those who were visible
and those who were invisible, with their arrows resembling venomous snakes.

The dust rising from the hooves of horses and the wheels of the chariots blocked the
ears and the eyes of the combatants.

While that terrible battle was taking place, causing the hair to bristle; very
terrible rivers with streams of blood were flowing there.

There arose a marvelous sound of kettle drums and tabors, mixed with the sounds of
counches, fellies of chariot-wheels and drums.

There appeared a terrific sound resonated by horses, demons and monkeys being
wounded.

The assassinated great monkeys, spears, maces, axes and the slaughtered demons, who
were able to change their form at will and with their bodies appearing like mountains were lying
there on the battle-field. And those weapons appeared to be offered up as a profusion of flowers by
the earth, which became hidden and rendered impassable by the slime formed out of streams of
blood.

That fatal night became as calamitous to the monkeys and demons, as a night of
dissolution, which is difficult to be overcome by all beings.

In that very terrible darkness, those demons thrilling with rapture attacked Rama
with showers of arrows.

Yelling in fury, the sound of those demons approaching in order to assault Rama was
like the noise of the oceans at the time of destruction of all the creatures.

Within a twinkling of an eye, Rama with six sharp arrows resembling tongues of
flame, struck down six of those demons.

The unconquerable Yagnashatru, Mahaparashva, Mahodara, the giant bodied
Vajradamshtra, both Shuka and Sarana - all those six having been beaten by Rama on their vital
organs with a flood of his arrows, retreated from the battle and somehow survived for the rest of
their life.

Rama the great warrior, merely within an instant, made the quarters and the
intermediate quarters, clear of all the demons, by his arrows resembling flames of fire.

The other valiant demons, who were standing with their face turning towards Rama,
also perished like moths, having encountered the same fire.

That night, with the golden shafts of arrows, flying on all sides, appeared
bright-coloured, like an autumnal night with its fire-flies on all sides.

The terrible night on that day became more terrible again by the sound of
kettle-drums and by the roaring sounds of the demons.

By that great sound, which re-echoed on all sides, the mountain Trikuta, full of
caves, appeared to be uttering confused murmurs.

Long-tailed and black faced monkeys with their gigantic bodies and dark-like figure,
crushed the demons with their arms and allowed them to be eaten (by jackals, vultures etc).

Angada on his part, who came to annihilate the enemies in that battle-field, struck
Indrajit, his charioteer and the horses all at once.

While that awful and very intense battle was going on, Indrajit a great trickster,
leaving the chariot, with its horses and charioteer killed by Angada, vanished from that very spot
itself.

All the celestials, both Rama and Lakshmana together with all sages were pleased
with that act of the venerable Angada the son of Vali.

Since all the living beings knew the supernatural powers of Indrajit in battle, they
were pleased on seeing that highly gifted demon being defeated by Angada.

Seeing the enemy defeated, those monkeys along with Sugreeva and Vibhishana were
delighted and praised Angada as an efficient warrior.

Indrajit, on the other hand, then was driven to a very terrible rage, as he was
defeated in battle by Angada the son of Vali a dreadful monkey.

That Indrajit the son of Ravana, the sinful demon who had gone out of sight and was
cruel in battle, rendered himself as invisible again and hurled forth sharp arrows, bright as
lightning.

Being enraged in battle, Indrajit bursted out serpent-like terrible arrows into all
the limbs of Rama and Lakshmana who were born in Raghu dynasty.

Enveloped by illusion, he sought to confuse Rama and Lakshmana in the struggle there
and invisible to all beings through his magic arts, Indrajit the ranger of the night bound those
two brothers Rama and Lakshmana with a net work of arrows.

Then, the monkeys saw the two warriors, those lions among men, being wounded quickly
by the serpentine arrows of that enraged demons.

Not being able to hurt those two princes in his manifest form, Indrajit the son of
the king of demons with his perverse mind, had recourse to magic in order to make them captive.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Bound by that formidable network of arrows, the two high-souled sons of dasaratha
lay bathed in blood, breathing like serpants. All those foremost of monkeys who were exceedingly
strong, including Sugreeva, plunged in grief, were standing around those two illustrious
warriors.

In the meanwhile, the mighty Rama by virtue of his hardihood and native strength,
awoke from his swwon, despite the shafts that held him captive.

Then, beholding his brother, bleeding unconscious, firmly thrown on teh floor, and
his features changed, Rama full of grief lamented thus:

"Of what use to me is the recovery of Seetha or even life itself, since my brother
now lying, before my eyes, has been struck down in teh fight?"

"It can be possible, if I were to look for her, to find a consort equal to Seetha in
this world of mortals but not a brother, a friend and a comrade in a hostile war, such as
Lakshmana!"

"If Lakshmana returned to the five elements, he the increaser of Sumitra's joy, I
will yield up my life-breaths while the monkeys stand looking on."

"What shall I say to my mother, Kausalya or to Kaikeyi? How can I talk to my mother
Sumitra, sighing for the sight of her son?"

"How shall I console Sumitra, trembling and crying out like an osprey, bereft of her
son, if I return to Ayodhya without lakshmana?"

"How shall I tell Shatrughna and the illustrious Bharata when I return without
Lakshmana, who followed to the forest along with me?"

"Alas! I should not be able to endure Sumitra's reproaches. I will leave my body
here itself. I do not wish to continue living."

"Woe unto me to my wicked deed and to my lack of nobility. Through my fault,
Lakshmana has fallen and lies indeed on a bed of arrows as on who has yielded up his life!"

"O, Lakshmana! You always used to consoe me whenever I was in a great sorrow. You,
having lost your life now are not able to allay my sufferings with your words."

"You, who in this battle today, struck down inummerable demons to the earth, are
fallen, pierced by darts, like a hero on the self same field."

"Lying on this bed of arrows, bathed in blood, you are piled up; sharajaalaiH= in a
heap of arrows; saH= you, as such; bhaasi= look; bhaaskaraH= iva= like the sun; vrajan= setting
behind; astam= the horizon.

"Your vital parts having been pierced with arrows, you are not able even to speak
now. Eventhough you not speaking, your agony is disclosed by the redness of your eyes."

"I shall follow him to the region of Yama, as that illustrious warrior accompanied
me when I retired to the forest."

"He who loved his own kinsfolk and was filled iwth devotion for me, got this state
to which my misdeeds have brought him, wretched that I am!"

"I do not remember to have heard any harsh or hateful words from that valiant
Lakshmana, even if he is deeply provoked."

"Lakshmana, who was able to loose five hundred arrows in one shot, was surpassing
kartavirya himself in the science of archery."

"This Lakshmana, who was accustomed to a rich couch and who by his arrows severe the
weapons the mighty Indra the Lord of celestials, is lying slain on the ground."

"Those vain words uttered by me, will ndoubtedly consume me since I have not made
Vibhishana the king of demons."

"O, Sugreeva! You ought to return at once from here since knowing that you are
bereft of my support, Ravana will overcome you, O king!"

"O, Sugreeva! Recross the sea with your army, keeping Angada in front and with your
followers, Nila and Nala."

"I am fully satisfied by the great military exploit, done by Jambavan the king of
Bears and the General of the Monkeys, which was impossible to any other in battle."

"A great act was done by Angada, Mainda and Dvivida. A terrible combat was done by
Kesari and Sampati in the battle-field."

"By Gavaya, Gavaksha, Sharabha, Gaja and other monkeys, who are willing to sacrifice
their lives for me, the battle was carried on."

"O, Sugreeva! It is not possible for mortals to avoid their destiny. O, Sugreeva the
tormentat of enemies! Fearing to fail in your duty, you have done all that which a friend and a
comrade could do."

"O. foremost of Monkyes! You have accomplished all this due to your friendship. I
take leave of you all; go where it seems best to you!"

All the tawny eyed monkeys, who heard Rama's lament thus, allowed tears to fall from
their eyes.

Meanwhile, Vibhishana having established order in all the ranks, with mace in his
hand, came quickly to Rama.

Seeing him, who resembled a mass of collyrium, hastening towards them thus, all the
monkeys thinking him to be Indrajit the son of Ravana, fled away.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing her husband and the mighty Lakshmana having been killed, Seetha was very much
emaiated through grief and lamented pitiably (as follows):

"The sooth sayers, reading the marks and signs on my body, prophesized that I shall
bear sons and never be widowed. Now that Rama has been slain, their words have proved to be
untrue."

"Since Rama is slian, all those astrologers, who predicted that I shold be the
companio of a sattra sacrifice and the consort of the performer of great sacrifices, now have
proved to be utteres of falsehood."

"Now that Rama has been slain, all those sooth-sayers who predicted that I should be
honoured by my husband as well as the wives of warriors and kings, are proved to be liars."

"Now that Rama has been slain, all those astrologers among the wise brahmins. Who
openly foretold that I should remain happy with my husband are proved to have spoken falsely!"

"Yet I bear the marks of lotus on my soles by virtue of which high-born women are
consecrated on an imperial throne with their husbands and lords."

"I do not find those marks of ill-fortune which betoken widowhood in women who are
ill-starred and as I examine, all the auspicious signs appear to be rendered void for me."

"Those marks of the lotus said to be good angury for women by wise men, have become
meaningless, now that Rama is slain."

"My hair is fine, black in colour and smooth. My eye-brows are disunited. My shanks
are hair-less and well rounded. My teeth are contiguous, without any gaps between them."

"My temples, eyes, arms, feet, ankles and thights are homogenous and
well-proportioned. My fingers have well-rounded and glossy nails, having a right lenght."

"My breasts are close to each other, fully developed and have depressed nipples. My
navel is deeply idented. My flanks and bossom are well-formed."

"My complexion has the sheen of a pearl. The hair on my skin are soft. It is said of
me as endowed with auspicious signs, in that I touched the ground with my twelve limbs (viz. the
ten toes and two soles).

"Those who interpret the marks of youthful maidens spoke of me that my hands and
feet are rosy, fully provided with marks each resembling a barley corn, devoid of space between my
fingers and toes and that my smile is gentle."

"All that was told by brahmins well-versed in sooth-saying, of me that- I should be
consecrated on the imperial throne along with my husband -proved to be in vain."

"Having searched all the resorts of men, received the tidings of my fate, and
crossed the impassable ocean, those two brothers have perishe din the imprint of a cow's hoof ( a
small puddle)."

"Rama and Lakshmana surely knew the use of the arrows of Varuna, Agni, Indra and
Vayu, as also the Brahmashira weapon."

"By means of magic arts, an invisible foe has slain Rama and Lakshmana, my
protectors, who are equal to Indra in battle and I am now bereft of any support."

"Having reached the range of sight of Rama in a combat, no enemy could return alive,
eventhough he were endowed with the swiftness of thought."

There is no burden too heavy for death to shoulder, as Rama along with his brother
are lying struck down on the battle-field. Fate is inexorable."

"I do not repent so much for Rama and Lakshmana or for myself or even my mother but
for my unfortunate mother-in-law, Kausalya."

"Kausalya for her part, forever remains absorbed in the thought 'When shall I see
Lakshmana and Seetha with Rama returned (to Ayodhya) having completed his vow (of remaining in
exile in the forest for fourteen years)?"

The demoness Trijata spoke to that lamenting Seetha as follows : "O, the god-like
lady! Do not despair. Your husband, Rama is still living."

"O, godlike lady! I will tell you mighty and cogent reasons, how these two brothers
Rama and Lakshmana are living."

"The leader having been lost, the faces of the soldiers on the field of battle are
never seized by anger nor are they animated with joy."

"O, Seetha! This aerial car called Pushpaka by name, celestial as it is, would not
have brought you here, if those two heroes have lost their lives."

"An army that sees its valiant commander falll, is bereft of courage and wanders
aimlessly about on the battle field, like a ship which has broken its rudder in water."

"This army for its part is neither confused nor perturbed and is guarding Rama and
Lakshman. I am pointing this out to you on account of my affection for you, O lady given to
austerities!"

"You as such, be reassured by these auspicious omens. Behold Rama and Lakshman who
are not dead. I am telling you this, on account of my affection for you."

"O, Seetha! I have not spoken falsehood before, nor shall I ever do so. By your
conduct and natural gaiety, you have found a place in my heart!"

"Even celestials and demons along with Indra cannot vanquish there two heroes in
battle. This is what I have observed and communicated to you."

"O Seetha!; See this, a great marvel !; See how, fallen under those shafts and
deprived of their senses, thier beauty has not deserted them."

"Generally, the faces of those who lost their lives and whose vital power has
vanished, will be appearing with an appalling alteration".

"O, Seetha! Banish your grief, pain and ignorance on account of Rama and Lakshmana.
It is impossible, now with the splendour seen in their faces, for Rama and Lakshmana to die."

Hearing her words, Seetha, the daughter of Mithila kingdom resembling a daughter of
gods, with joined palms exclaimed, "May it be so."

After sending back that aerial car, Pushpaka which was as swift as the thought, the
sorrowful Seetha was caused by Trijata to enter Lanka once more.

Thereafter, Seetha along with Trijata who descended from Pshpaka the aerial car,
were caused by the female demons, to enter the Ashoka grove again.

Entering that Ashoka grove, planted with a multitude of trees, sporting ground of
Ravana and recalling the two princes who she had just seen, Seetha gave way to extreme grief.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Being killed by each other in that major battle, those two armies were very much
diminished soon, like two lakes in a severe summer.

Ravana the lord of demons got doubly enraged because of the destroyal of his own
army and the fall of Virupaksha.

He felt restless to find his own army diminished while being killed by the monkeys
and to see the reversal of his fate.

He spoke to Mahodara, the annihilator of enemies, standing beside him (as follows):
"O the long-armed! At this juncture, my hope for victory is centered in you."

"O the brave demon! Destroy the army of our enemies. Show your prowess now. This is
the time to repay the debt of your master (received in the form of sustenance from him). Fight
well."

Hearing the words of Ravana, Mahodara the chief of demons saying "So it be",
penetrated into the army of enemies, as a moth rushed into a flame.

Emboldened by the words of his master, that mighty demon, with full of energy,
destroyed the monkeys by dint of his own valour.

Taking hold of huge rocks and penetrating the terrific army of enemies, those highly
strong monkeys too started killing all the demons.

In that great battle, the highly enraged Mahodara, with his arrows decked in gold,
chopped off the hands, feet and thighs of monkeys.

Then, among all those monkeys who were tormented by the demons, some ran away into
ten directions. Some others sought refuge with Sugreeva.

Seeing the large army of monkeys defeated in the battle, Sugreeva rushed towards
Mahodara who was immediately close to him.

Seizing hold of a large and terrific rock, which looked like a mountain, Sugreeva
who was endowed with a great energy, hurled it with an aim to kill the demon.

Seeing that rock falling suddenly, Mahodara, then unagitated, tore it with his
arrows, though it was difficult to approach.

That rock, broken to a thousand pieces by that demon with a multitude of his arrows,
forthwith fell down on earth, like a flock of frightened vultures.

Filled with rage on seeing that rock broken and uprooting a Sala tree, Sugreeva
hurled it at his enemy and Mahodara chopped it off into many pieces.

The valiant Mahodara, who was the tormentator of hostile forces, lacerated Sugreeva
with his arrows. That enraged Sugreeva then saw an iron rod on the ground.

Swinging that flashing iron rod and showing it to him, Sugreeva killed the excellent
horses of Mahodara with that iron rod of terrible speed.

Jumping down from that huge chariot, whose horses had been killed, that valiant
Mahodara the demon, thereupon seized hold of a mace with anger.

With a mace and an iron road respectively in their hands and roaring like two bulls
and resembling like two clouds charged with lightning, those two heroes closed in for a battle.

Mahodara the demon was angry with Sgureeva and thereupon hurled his blazing mace,
which shone like the sun, on Sugreeva.

Seeing that highly terrible mace, falling on him in that great battle, the mighty
Sugreeva, the King of monkeys, was enraged with red eyes and struck that mace, by lifting up the
iron rod. That iron rod broke off and fell on the ground.

Thereupon, the spirited Sugreeva took hold of a formidable steel club, entirely
decked with gold, from the earth-surface.

Lifting that steel club, Sugreeva hurled it. Mahodara too hurled another mace on
him. Those two weapons, clashing each other, broke and fell on the floor.

As all their weapons were broken, those two warriors, who were endowed with spirit
and strength, resembling two blazing fires, started contending with fists.

Roaring again and again, those two warriors then banged each other. Slapping each
other with their palms, they rolled on the earth's surface.

They raised quickly on their feet and then began to strike each other. Remaining
unyielded, the two heroes pushed each other on their shoulders.

Those two heroes, the annihilators their enemies, felt exhausted in the course of
their wrestling. Then the highly fast Mahodara the demon took hold of a sword and a shield, lying
not very far.

In the same way, the highly swift Sugreeva the foremost of monkeys took hold of a
large sword together with a shield, lying there.

Thereupon, those two warriors, who were skilled in the use of weaponry in the
battle-field and whose limbs were seized with anger, galloped forward, roaring with joy, with their
swords upraised.

With their thoughts concentrated on one point of victory, both the warriors were
enraged with each other and performed circumambulations form left to right, very quickly.

That valiant and evil-minded Mahodara, who was boasting of his own prowess, let fall
with very high speed, that sword on the heavy shield of Sugreeva.

Even while Mahodara was extracting his sword which had got struck in the shield,
Sugreeva severed with his own sword, Mahodara's head, which was adorned with ear-rings and
helmet.

While Mahodara, with his head chopped off, was falling on the ground, Ravana's army,
on seeing it, could no longer be seen on the battle-field.

Having killed Mahodara, Sugreeva made a rejoicing roar with his monkeys. Ravana was
enraged. Rama looked rejoicing.

With their faces looking low-spirited all the demons felt dejected. With their minds
stricken with fear, all of them ran away from the battle-field.

Having thrown down to the ground that Mahodara, looking like a part of a huge
mountain lying shattered the invincible Sugreeva shone in glory in the battle-field like the sun
shines with its rays.

Having attained victory in the battle-front, Sugreeva then continued to be looked at
by the multitude of gods, Siddhas (a class of demigods who are endowed with mystic powers) and
Yakshas (another class of demigods attending on Kubera, the god of riches) as also a host of beings
standing on the earth's surface who were all overwhelmed with joy.
undefined
undefined
undefined

That mighty Kumbhakarna, with his colossal body resembling the peak of a mountain,
having crossed the rampart, sallied forth from the city.

Kumbhakarna emitted a roar, making the sea to reverberate, causing the mountains to
quake and drowning the thunder-claps, as it were.

Seeing that demons of terrific eyes who could not be destroyed either by Indra the
lord of celestials or by Yama the lord of death or by Varuna the god of water, the monkeys ran
away.

Seeing them running away, Angada the prince spoke to Nala, Neela, Gavaksha and the
mighty Kumuda as follows:

"Where do you go, forgetting your own dignities as also nobilities of birth and
trembling with fear like common monkeys?"

"O auspicious monkeys! Please return! Why do you so fully guard your lives? This
demon is not competent for a combat. He is merely a great toy of terror."

"O monkeys! By our prowess, we shall destroy this giant toy produced by demons. Come
back!"

Reconciling themselves with some difficulty, the monkeys, from all sides, assembled
together at a place and snatching some trees, the monkeys for their part, towards the
battle-field.

Like elephants in rut, those monkeys, having came back, hurriedly hit Kumbhakarna,
very much enraged as they were.

The mighty Kumbhakarna, though assaulted with lofty mountain-tops, rocks and trees
with blossoms at their ends, stood unshaken.

Many rocks, fallen on his limbs, got burst into pieces. The trees, with blossoms at
their ends, were broken and fell shattered on the floor.

Kumbhakarna too, very much enraged, crushed the ranks of monkeys though they were
greatly energetic, with his extreme exertion even as a rising fire would consume the woods.

Many of the foremost among the monkeys lay on the ground, bathed in blood as they
were, fallen like trees with crimson flowers, when tossed up by the demon.

Some monkeys, while jumping and running away, did not look back. Some fell in the
ocean. Some inhabited the sky.

While that demon was killing some warriors of monkeys playfully, some others ran
away by the same route, by which they earlier crossed the ocean.

While some monkeys becoming pale-faced due to fear, inhabited the mounds and the low
grounds, some bears ascended the trees. Some escaped to a hill.

Some were drowned in the ocean. Some had recourse into the caves. Some others
escaped. Some could not even stand stable on the ground. Some fell down. Some lied down, as though
they were dead.

Seeing those monkeys disorderly retreated, Angada spoke these words, "Stay. We shall
carry on the battle. Come back."

"I do not catch sight of any place for you, who have retreated, even if you roam
over the entire earth. Let all of you come back. Why do you safeguard your lives?"

"O valiant monkeys, moving without hindrances! Your wives, seeing you running away
leaving your weapos aside, will mock at you. It is indeed a death for those who lived well."

"All of us are born in distinguished races; which are well developed. Where to you
go frightened, like ordinary monkeys? As you are running away with fear, leaving all your valour,
you are indeed unworthy of honour."

"Where did those boasting words of you melt away, in which you highly projected
yourself in front of the people just before coming for the battle?

"The cowards, who survive even after being reproached, have to hear slanders from
the people. Let the path trodden by the good people be followed. Let your fear be abandoned."

"If our longevity is short, we shall lie down, being killed by the enemies, on the
earth and reach the realm of Brahma (residence of pious spirits), which is difficult to be attained
by bad warriors."

"O monkeys! We shall obtain glory by killing our enemies in battle or if killed on
the other hand, we shall enjoy the heaven, attained by the warriors."

"Coming face to face with Rama, Kumbhakarna will not go back alive, any more than a
moth meeting a blazing fire."

"If we, in large numbers, who are intended to fight, are conquered by one person
alone and if we protect our lives by running away, our glory will undergo a damage."

Then, those fleeing monkeys spoke the following words, which were contemptible by
the warriors, to that valiant Angada, who was adorneed with golden armlets.

"For us, it is enough of this terrific battle with Kumbhakarna, the demon. It is not
the proper time to stay back but it is to time to go away. Life is indeed dear to us."

Seeing that terrific Kumbhakarna coming with his dreadful eyes, all those commanders
of monkey-troops, speaking words only thus far, scattered in all directions.

Thereafter, with the coaxing words and inferential arguments by Angada, all those
fleeing commanders of monkeys turned back.

Having been cheered up by the intellectual Angada, all those commanders of the
army-troops stood awaiting his command.

Rishabha, Sharabha, Mainda, Dhumra, Neela, Kumuda, sushena, Gavaksha, Rambha, Tara
and more particularly Dvipada, Panasa and hanuma marched ahead very quickly, with their faces
turned towards the battle.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Tormented by Rama in fury, that Ravana then for his part, who was boasting of his
fight, flew into a great rage.

Raising his bow, his eyes blazing with anger, extremely enraged as he was with Rama
in that great battle, the valiant Ravana of prowess continued to oppress, by covering Rama with
thousands of streams of arrows, as a rainy cloud would fill a pond with thousands of arrow-like
torrents from the sky.

Covered by a multitude of arrows discharged from Ravana's bow in battle, Rama did
not wince, like a large mountain which was unshakable.

The valiant Rama stood interrupting the torrents of arrows with his own arrows in
the battle-field and endured them as rays of the sun.

Then, the enraged Ravana of brisk hand, struck thousands of arrows into the breast
of the great-souled Rama.

Rama, bathed in blood in the battle-field, appeared like a very big Kimshuka tree
with bloom in a forest.

Enraged at the impact of the arrows, that Rama of very great splendour , took hold
of arrows which shone like the sun at the time of dissolution of the world.

Both Rama and Ravana who were see each other at that time in the battle-field, which
was shrouded in darkness by the arrows.

Bursting into laughter, though filled with anger, the valiant Rama, the son of
Dasaratha spoke the following harsh words to Ravana.

"O the worst of demons! Since you took away my helpless wife without my notice from
Janasthana, hence you are not a person of prowess."

"Having taken away by force the miserable Seetha while she was staying in the forest
away from me, you think: �I am a champion'."

"Having done an act of cowardly persons of laying your hands on another's wife,
posing as a hero in relation to women without a protector, you think: "I am a champion'."

"O shameless person, who have broken the bounds of morality and are unstable of
customs, having laid hold through vanity of death (in the form of Seetha) you think �I am a
champion'."

"Indeed a praiseworthy, great and glorious act has been performed by you, a valiant
brother of Kubera, the god of wealth, rich in strength!"

"Reap now and today the stupendous fruit of that noxious and contemptible act,
perpetrated through sheer vanity."

"O evil-minded one! You think: �I am a champion' yourself! Shame did not stand in
your way at all, for having taken away Seetha like a thief."

"If Seetha were laid hands upon by you in my presence, you would have surely seen
your brother Khara at that very moment when killed with my arrows."

"Thank heaven, O stupid fellow, you have come within the range of my sight. I will
dispatch you to the world of Death, by my sharp arrows, today."

"Let your head, having blazing ear-rings lying on the dust-laden battle-field, be
carried away by beasts of prey, after being chopped off by my arrows today."

"O Ravana! Let vultures fly down on your wounded breast when you have been thrown
down on the ground and oozing out from the orifices caused by the impact of my pointed
arrow-tips."

"Let birds (such as crows and vultures) tear out your bowels, as eagles would drag
serpents when you fall down dead when pierced by my arrows today."

Thus speaking, the valiant Rama, the annihilator of enemies, poured out streams of
arrows on Ravana, who was in the vicinity.

The prowess, the strength, the enthusiasm and the stamina of arms of Rama became
two-fold, when he longed for the death of his enemy in battle.

All kinds of mystic missiles came to light in the mind of Rama the learned self and
in his excessive enthusiasm, Rama of extra-ordinary energy became all the more swift-handed.

Recognizing those good omens, Rama, the destroyer of demons, tormented Ravana even
more vehemently.

While being struck by volleys of stones hurled by the monkeys and the showers of
arrows coming from Rama, Ravana felt bewildered at heart.

Ravana could no longer take up weapons, nor stretch his bow, nor reacted to Rama's
prowess - on account of his mind being confused.

As the time of his death approached, the arrows swiftly hurled and the various kinds
of missiles employed by Ravana did not turn to be of any use in battle.

Seeing Ravana reduced to such a plight, the charioteer driving the chariot, for his
part, without getting excited, calmly and slowly carried off his chariot away from the
battle-front.

On seeing Ravana, the king sunk down; hopelessly bereft of energy, the charioteer
diverting in haste the chariot of Ravana, which was rumbling like a cloud, thereupon sneaked away
from the battle-field in dismay.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Thrilling with rapture, that charioteer, the charioteer of Ravana, drove forward
quickly, his chariot, a chariot, which was capable of attacking the army of enemies, a wonderful
piece of art like Gandharva-city, an imaginary city in the sky, mounted with flags, yoked with
horses of excellent quality adorned with golden necklaces, filled with war-implements, adorned with
rows of flags and banners, which was devouring the sky as it were, making the earth resound, which
was the destroyer of the army of adversaries and caused delight to its own.

Rama saw that Ravana's chariot, which was coming speedily with a noise, bearing a
large flag-staff, yoked with black horses, endowed with a terrific luster, blazing like an aerial
car in the sky, with a luster of the sun, filled with lightning-like flags and with a beautiful
appearance of a rain-bow.

Seeing that chariot, releasing streams of arrows, like a cloud releasing streams of
rain, with a noise equal to that of a bursting mountain, struck with a diamond, Rama after
stretching his bow in a crescent shape, spoke to Matali, Indra's charioteer as follows:

"O Matali! From the way in which the enemy is marching forward from left to right
with a great speed in his chariot more, it appears that heart has been set by him upon destroying
himself in the battle."

"Therefore, take care and march forward, facing the chariot of the enemy I wish to
destroy it, even as the wind would blow a cloud."

"Without fear and flurry and with a steady heart and vision, and the movement of the
reins fully controlled, drive the chariot swiftly."

"You need not be instructed by me, accustomed as you are to drive the chariot of
Indra the lord of celestials. Keen as I am to fight with a close attention, I am just reminding you
and not teaching you."

Extremely gratified with those words of Rama, that Matali the excellent charioteer
of gods drove on the chariot.

Passing the huge chariot of Ravana on the right, the charioteer then set Ravana
shaking, by the dust risen from the wheels of his own chariot.

The enraged Ravana then, with his coppery eyes wide open, trembled Rama, who stood
facing his chariot, with arrows.

Meeting fortitude with anger, though provoked with assault, Rama took hold of
Indra's bow, which was possessed of extra ordinary impulse in the battle-field.

He also seized hold of arrows of exceeding swiftness, which were shining like
sun-beams. Then began that great battle between the two warriors (Rama and Ravana) who were
desirous of killing each other, while facing each other like two proud lions.

Then, the gods along with the Gandharvas the celestial musicians, Siddhas the
demigods and great sages, desirous of Ravana's ruin, arrived to see the battle of both the
chariot-warrriors.

Thereupon, terrific portents that caused one's hair to stand on end, appeared giving
an augury of doom to Ravana and prosperity to Rama.

The god of rains poured blood on Ravana's chariot. Horrible winds blew from right to
left, forming circles.

A large flock of vultures, roaming about in the sky, was flying forward in the same
direction in which Ravana's chariot was going.

Lanka was overcast with dusk, resembling a (red) Japa flower. The land in Lanka, as
also the day appeared as if they were blazing.

Large meteors, along with lightnings fell with great noise. Those entities, inimical
to Ravana, made demons to lament.

The earth on which Ravana was there, trembled. The arms of fighting demons looked as
if they were clasped.

Fallen before Ravana, the rays of the sun appeared coppery, yellow, white and dark,
like mineral ores on a mountain.

The she-jackals followed by vultures hastily uttered inauspicious howls, on
beholding Ravana's face as also vomiting fire from their mouths.

Scattering the dust upwards over the battle-field and clouding the vision of that
Ravana, the wind blew in a direction inimicable to him.

Even without the appearance of clouds, thunderbolts fell on his army on all sides,
with a noise which was hard to endure.

All the quarters and intermediate points of the compass became covered with darkness
and due to outpourings of dust, the sky became difficult to be seen.

Hundreds of dreadful Sarika* birds, with their awful howls, terribly fighting there,
fell down upon Ravana's chariot.

His horses discharged sparks of fire from their hips and loins as also tears from
their eyes, releasing out fire and water at the same time continuously.

Frightful portents in multitude thus sprang up, bringing danger and destruction to
Ravana.

Pleasant and auspicious omens, depicting victory of Rama appeared on all sides,
before Rama.

Seeing the pleasant omens depicting his victory, Rama was very much pleased and
considered Ravana as (already) dead.

Then Rama, with the knowledge of all omens, having seen those portents in his own
way in the battle-field, obtained rejoice as well as extreme happiness and shown enhanced prowess
in combat.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Rama, who was unweary in action, with his shining arrows adorned with pure gold,
killed those thousands of elephants dispatched by Ravana, thousands of horses, valiant demons who
can change their form at will mounted on thousands of chariots with their flag-staffs, having the
colour of fire, fighting with maces and iron rods and conspicuous with their golden banners.

Seeing and hearing about the killing of the demons, the surviving demons well
frightened, looked sad and were overwhelmed with anxiety. They wailed when they met their wives.
All female-demons who lost their husbands, sons and kinsfolk met at one place, stricken as they
were with sorrow, wailed as follows:

"How did the old and ugly Surpanakha, of sunken belly, approach, in the forest, Rama
who is charming like the god of love?"

"How strange that on seeing that Rama of tender youth, endowed with extraordinary
strength and devoted to the welfare of all created beings, that ugly woman (Surpanakha) who
deserved to be condemned by the people, was stung with excessive lust?"

"How that ugly-faced demoness, who is bereft of all virtues, dared to make love to
Rama, who is full of virtues, endowed with great bodily strength and who possessed a charming
countenance?"

"Because of the ill-luck of these people, and to the destruction of demons and of
Dushana and Khara, that grey-haired and disgusting woman, who had developed wrinkles, tried to be
arrogant with Rama, misdeed which was worth ridiculing and condemned by the whole world."

"For the sake of that Surpanakha, Ravana built this huge enmity. For his own
destruction, Ravana the demon brought that Seetha."

"Ravana cannot obtain Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, but an endless enmity has been
built with the mighty Rama."

"Seeing that instance of Rama killing single-handedly Viradha the demon, who was
yearning for Seetha, is enough indeed (to convince Ravana of Rama's strength and ability)"

"In Janasthana, Rama killed fourteen thousand demons who were doing terrific feats,
with his arrows resembling tongues of fire."

"In that battle, Khara, Dushana and Trishira were killed with arrows resembling the
sun. That instance should have been sufficient (to open the eyes of Ravana)."

"Further, that Kabandha having arms with a length of eight miles each, with blood as
his food and roaring with anger was killed. That instance should have been sufficient."

"Rama killed the mighty Vali, the son of Indra the lord of celestials, looking like
the black cloud. That instance should have been sufficient. (To open the eyes of Ravana)"

"The kingdom was restored to the miserable Sugreeva, who was residing in Mount
Rishyamuka, living with his wishes disappointed. That instance should prove sufficient. (To open
the eyes of Ravana)."

"The appropriate advice tendered by Vibhishana which was conformable to duty and
interest of Ravana as also beneficial to all the demons, was not to the liking to him, due to his
ignorance."

"Had Ravana followed Vibhishana's advice, this Lanka would not have become a burial
ground, tormented by sorrow."

"Ravana is not able to learn a lesson, even after hearing that the mighty
Kumbhakarna was killed by Rama and that unconquerable colossal-bodied Indrajit, his beloved son was
killed by Lakshmana."

"Ravana is not able to learn a lesson, even after hearing that the mighty
Kumbhakarna was killed by Rama and that the unconquerable colossal-bodied Indrajit, his beloved son
was killed by Lakshmana."

"The valiant Rama killed hundreds and thousands of chariots, horses and elephants in
the battle. He killed even the foot soldiers too."

"Rama, coming in the form of either Rudra the lord of destruction or Vishnu, the
lord of preservation, or Indra the lord of celestials who performed one hundred ritual sacrifices,
or otherwise Yama, the Lord of Death himself, is killing us."

"As Rama killed all our great warriors, we are lamenting with a loss of hope in our
lives, failing to see an end to our fear and having become helpless."

"The valiant Ravana, having been gifted with great boons by Brahma, is not able to
understand this greatly terrific calamity, coming forth from the hand of Rama."

"Neither the celestials nor Gandharvas the celestial musicians nor the evil spirits
nor the demons are able to protect Ravana, who is about to attack Rama in battle."

"Bad omens are appearing for Ravana, as and when his warriors are setting out for
each combat. They are indeed telling about the prospective annihilation of Ravana by Rama."

Brahma, the lord of creation, gratified by the austerity of Ravana, gave protection
to Ravana from celestials, demons and ogres. But Ravana did not seek protection from human
beings."

"I think that such a calamity has come from that humanity only dreadfully causing an
end to the lives for the demons and for Ravana too. There is no doubt about it."

"The celestials, tormented by the mighty Ravana, because of the misuse of the boon
bestowed on him, worshipped Brahma the lord of creation with their glowing austerities."

"The great-souled Brahma, duly gratified, spoke for the benefit of those celestials,
the following words to them:

"From today onwards, all the ogres and demons, constantly enveloped with fear, will
be wandering always in the three worlds."

"All the celestials together with Indra and others, got propitiated by Shiva the
lord of destruction, with the ensign of a bull on his flag-staff and who destroyed the three strong
cities built of gold, silver and iron in the sky, air and earth for demons."

"The gracious Shiva spoke the following words to the celestials: 'For your benefit,
a woman will be born, for causing destruction of the demons.'"

"This Seetha, the destroyer of demons, employed by the celestials, will consume us
along with Ravana, as in the past hunger consumed the demons."

"As a result of the bad behaviour of Ravana, the wicked demon with an evil
disposition of mind, this terrific havoc with grief occurred."

"Rama is occupying us, as the Death occupies at the time of dissolution of the
universe. We do not find any one now, who can give protection to us in this world."

"There is no refuge whatsoever for us, who stand in great danger, as indeed there is
no shelter for female-elephants, enveloped by a wild fire in a forest."

"The great-souled Vibhishana did something opportune. He sought refuge in him alone
from whom such a peril is perceived."

Then, all female-demons, embracing each other in their arms, afflicted as they were
with grief and tormented with excessive fear, lamented thus and wept loudly and severely.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing his brother lying down dead after defeat in battle, Vibhishana lamented, with
his mind filled with an outburst of sorrow:

"Why are you lying killed on the ground, though you are highly worthy of turning
towards lofty beds, O hero! The valiant one, the celebrated one, prudent in polity?"

"Having thrown about your two long arms which though decked wit armlets, are now
motionless and with your diadem brilliant as the sun, knocked down; why are you lying killed on the
ground/"

"O the valiant brother! That which was told by me earlier and that which was not
liked by you, as you were overcome with sensuality and infatuation; that very fate has been
obtained by you."

"For that which, because of arrogance, neither Prahasta nor Indrajit and others, nor
Kumbhakarna nor Atiratha nor Narantaka nor you yourself has agreed to my counsel, the consequence
of it has come now."

"As this hero, the foremost of those who wield the weapons, has fallen on the
ground, the established rule of well-conducted persons has gone. The incarnation of virtue has
departed. The epitome of strength has gone. The refuge of enlogies has gone out of sight. The sun
has fallen to the earth. The moon has merged in darkness. Fire has extinguished its flames and a
strennous effort has become inactive."

"What is remaining in this world now, while Ravana the foremost of demons, is at
present lying fast asleep in the dust?"

"With firmness for its shoot, endurance for its excellent blossom, asceticism for
its strength, and valour for its firm root, the large tree in the shape of Ravana has been crushed
in the battle-field, by the tempest in the shape of Rama."

"With sharpness for its tusks, the line of ancestors for its back-bone, anger for
its lower parts and graciousness for its proboscis, the elephant in rut in the shape of Ravana is
lying asleep on the ground, its body having been overthrown by a lion in the shape of Rama."

"With prowess and power for its expanded flames, sighs for its smoke and his native
strength for its glowing heat, the blazing fire in the shape of Ravana the demon has been
extingushed in the battle-field by the rainy cloud in the shape of Rama."

"With the demons for its tail; hump and horn and fickleness for its ears and eyes,
the bull in the shape of Ravana the demon, the conqueror of its enemies, which vied with the wind
in energy, is lying dead, struck down by a tiger in the shape of Rama, the ruler of the earth."

To Vibhishana, who was thus speaking; enveloped in sorrow, Rama spoke the following
words, full of reason and which revealed his determined view of the matter.

"Ravana did not die in battle, without making an effort. He has fallen in combat,
eventhough he was endowed with terrible prowess and exhibited extra ordinary enthusiasm of a very
exalted type and remained confident throughout."

"There is no occasion to grieve for him having fallen into death in the battle-field
and by whom the development of his country was wished for, while remaining steadfast in the duty of
Kshatriya the warrior."

"There is no occasion to grieve for his having been brought under the sway of death
by whom intelligent as he was, all the three worlds including indra were frightened."

"In the past, none has ever been exclusively victorious in a combat. A hero either
has been killed by his adversaries or had killed the enemies in battle."

"Such is the destiny proclaimed by the ancients, as highly esteemed for a warrior. A
warrior killed in battle, does not deserve to be mourned. Such is the ascertainment of the sacred
scriptures."

"Therefore, seeing this ascertainment, understanding the true principle, and free
from grief, think here of what duty that deserves to be performed."

To that valiant prince (Rama) by whom the aforesaid words were spoken, Vibhishana,
who was tormented with grief, spoke (as follows) about the suitable action to be done next in
relation to his brother.

"The demon, who had never been conquered before in battles, by even all the gods
combined or by Indra himself, has been conquered, on confronting you in the battle-field, as the
sea breaks up, on reaching the shore."

"By him, gifts were endowed to to mendicents. Pleasures too were enjoyed. The king's
servents were fully maintained. Rches were made over to friends. Grudges against enemiies were
revenged."

"He maintained a perpetually sacred fire. he practised great religious austerities.
He completely mastered Vedas, the sacred scriptures. He was highly proficient even in the ritual
acts. I desire to do, with you graciousness, that which is to be performed to him, who has departed
to the other world."

Thus getting the personality of Ravana well-acquainted by vibhishana by his
compassionate words, Rama possessing unimpaired goodness, directed Vibhishana to perfom funeral
rites, which were intended to lead the departed soul to heaven:

"Hostilities end with death. Our purpose has been accomplished. Let his funeral
rites be performed. He is even as good mine, as yours."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Having offered his salutation to that Rama, who was excellent among all the wielders
of the bow and whose eyes resembled the lotus-petals, that highly intelligent Hanuma spoke to him
as follows:

"You ought to see Seetha that divine lady who is consumed by grief, for whose sake
this course of actions was undertaken and which has (now) borne fruit."

"Hearing the news of your victory, that Seetha, stricken as she was with grief, is
now longing to see you, her eyes filled with tears of joy."

"By her, who has trust in me because of confidence which has trust in me because of
confidence which had been inspired me on a former occasion, I was spoken as follows: 'I desire to
see my husband, who has accomplished his purpose, together with Lakshmana.'"

Hearing Hanuma's words, Rama who was the foremost among the supporters of
righteousness, was a little over whelmed with tears and suddenly became a bit thoughtful.

Drawing a deep and warm breath and casting his looks on the ground, he spoke (as
follows) to Vibhishana, who closely resembled a cloud in hue and who was standing nearby.

"Bring here Seetha, after she has bathed her head, has been anointed with charming
cosmetics and adorned with beautiful jewels. Let there be no delay."

Hearing the words of Rama, Vibhishana, after entering the gynaecium in haste,
communicated his presence to Seetha, through his own women.

Then, the glorious Vibhishana the king of demons, after seeing the highly fortunate
Seetha, with his palms joined over his head, humbly spoke to her as follows:

"O Seetha! Anointed with charming cosmetics and adorned with beautiful jewels if you
please, mount on the vehicle. Your husband wants to see you."

Hearing the words of Vibhishana, replied as follows: "O king of demons! I wish to
see my husband, even without taking my bath."

Hearing those words of Seetha, Vibhishana replied as follows: "You ought to do the
bidding of Rama, your husband, as he has enjoined you to do."

Hearing those words of Vibhishana, the virtuous Seetha, regarding her husband as a
divinity, endowed as she was with a devotion to her husband, said in reply, "So t be!"

Prevailing upon Seetha to ascend a shining palanquin, covered with an exceedingly
valuable cloth and guarded by numerous demons, after she had bathed her head and cleansed her body,
had put on costly robes and had been adorned with exceedingly valuable jewels, Vibhishana then
brought her to the presence of Rama.

Approaching the great-souled Rama, who was absorbed in thought, even after coming to
know that Seetha had arrived, Vibhishana offered his obeisance and with full of great joy,
announced to him that Seetha had arrived.

Hearing that Seetha had arrived after living long in the abode of a demon, Rama was
filled with joy, indignation and felt miserable too all the three emotions at the same time.

Feeling unhappy on considering with deep thought, the question of Seetha having come
in a palanquin, all the way, Rama then spoke the following words, looking at Vibhishana who was
beside him.

"O the gently king of demons, who is forever intent on my victory! Let Seetha duly
seek my presence quickly."

Hearing those words of that Rama, Vibhishana, who knew what was right, began to
disperse the crowd there quickly.

Demons wearing jackets and turbans, their hands carrying staffs which made a
jingling sound, walked there all round, dispersing those warriors.

Crowds of bears, monkeys and demons, dispersed on all sides, bounced for a distance,
from their nearness to the palanquin.

While those warriors were being driven away, there was a very great sound,
resembling the roar of a sea, lashed by a storm.

Seeing them being dispersed on all sides excited, Rama then stopped that operation
of those who were dispersing them, out of kindness (for those who were being driven away) and
resentment (at the behaviour of the demons who were dispersing them).

The enraged Rama, consuming the demons with his looks as it were, Rama spoke the
following reproaching words to the highly intelligent Vibhishana

"Why disregarding me, are these people harassed by you? Stop this exertion. They are
my own people."

"An apartment is not a thing that protects a woman, nor robes, nor compound-walls,
nor concealments nor such royal honours. Her character is her shield."

"A woman becoming visible to public in times of a calamity is not condemned in
difficult situations, nor in battles, nor in self-choosing of a husband by a princess at a public
assembly of suitors, nor in sacrificial ceremonies nor in marriage-functions."

"The younder Seetha is in distress and beset with a great difficulty. There is no
fault in her appearance in public, particularly in my presence."

"That is why, let her come on foot alone, leaving the palanquin there. Let these
monkeys see Seetha in my presence."

Hearing the words of Rama the intelligent Vibhishana, with decency, brought Seetha
to Rama's vicinity.

Hearing the words of Rama, Lakshmana Sugreeva and Hanuma the monkey then felt very
much perturbed.

From the pitiless facial features of Rama, showing indifference to his consort, they
conjectured as if Rama had some displeasure towards Seetha.

Seetha, for her part, shrinking into her limbs with modesty, approached her husband,
duly followed by Vibhishana.

The pleasant-faced Seetha, who considered her husband as the divinity, saw the
charming face of her husband, with a surprise, rejoice and affection.

Seeing the face of her beloved husband, which had not been seen for a long time and
which was charming like the rising full moon, she forth dispelled her mental fatigue.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Thereafter, the spies informed Ravana about Rama, with his unperturbable army,
having encamped on Suvela Mountain.

Hearing from the spies about the arrival of Rama, the exceedingly strong man, Ravana
became a little perturbed and spoke to Shardula as follows:

O, demon! Your complexion is not so as it should be. You look miserable too. I hope
that you have not fallen a victim to the enraged monkeys."

Thus questioned by Ravana, Shardula afflicted with fear, then sluggishly spoke the
following words to Ravana the tiger among demons:

"O, king! Those strong, bold and excellent monkeys protected by Rama are not capable
of being spied upon."

"They are not capable of being talked with and nothing can be found in interrogating
with them. The entire path is being protected by the monkeys looking like mountains."

"I was identified when that army was merely penetrated into (by me) and began to be
examined. I was seized forcibly by the demons (forming the retinue of Vibhishana), who investigated
me in various ways."

"I was beaten on all sides with knees, fists, teeth and palms by the enraged
monkeys. I was also paraded round in the midst of their army."

"Having been paraded all around thus, I was finally taken to the court of Rama. All
my limbs were bleeding and Rama. All my limbs were bleeding and I was trembling, with my senses
disturbed."

"While being plagued by the monkeys and asked for protection with joined palms, I
was saved fortunately by Rama, saying �stay!stay!'

"Rama has filled the sea with boulders and rocks, taking up his position at the
gates of Lanka and stands there, well-equipped with weapons."

"Having released me, Rama of great splendour arranged the army in the form of Garuda
(an eagle). He is encircled on all sides by the monkeys and is approaching towards Lanka."

"Before he reaches the ramparts, do one thing or the other quickly or give away
Seetha immediately or even offer him battle."

Having heard those words, Ravana the lord of demons reflected on it and thereafter
spoke the following significant words to Shardula.

"I will not give away Seetha even if the celestials or Gandharvas the celestial
musicians or the demons were to fight against me or even under danger from all beings."

After uttering the aforesaid words, the heroic Ravana again spoke as follows: "Has
the army been espied by you? Who are the valiant monkeys among them?"

"O, the virtuous gentle Shardula! What radiance do the monkeys, who are difficult to
be conquered possess of? what kind? Whose sons and grandsons are they? You tell me that
information."

"After knowing their strengths and weakness, I will decide in this matter
accordingly. Is it not necessary to count clearly those who are really yearning to fight the
battle?"

Hearing Ravana's words, Shardula the excellent spy then started to narrate these
words for Ravana's information:

"Certainly, king Sugreeva, the son of Riksharajasa, is difficult to be conquered in
battle. Here is the son of Gadgada, famously called as Jambavan."

"The other one is the son of the same Gadgada. Another one is the son of Brihaspati
the teacher of Indra the lord of celestials, called Kesari by whose son Hanuman the demons were
destroyed."

"O, king! Here is Sushena the son of Yama the Lord of Death who is valiant and
virtuous, as well as a monkey called Dadhimukha, the cool-minded, who is the son of moon."

"Sumukha, Durmukha and a monkey called Vegadarshi are surely the personifications of
death in the form of monkeys, created by Brahma, the Lord of creation."

"Here is Nila the army-general himself, the son of Agni the Lord of Fire. Here is
the son of Vayu the Lord of Wind well- known as Hanuman."

"The young Angada, Indra's grandson, the strong and invincible one, both the mighty
Mainda and Dvinda born of the two divinties of Ashvin* as well as Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sharabha
and Gandhamadhana the five sons of Yama the God of Death all of them resembling Yama at the time of
dissolution of the world, the valiant ten crores of monkeys who are yearning for battle are all
here. I cannot venture to tell about the remaining glorious sons of god."

"This young man is Rama, Dasartha's son, who is well-built like a lion, by whom
Dushana ws killed as also Khara and Trishana.

"There is no one on earth who is equal in prowess to Rama, by whom Viradha was
killed as also Kabandha who was equal to Yama."

"No man on this earth is able to narrate the qualities of Rama, by whom all the
demons staying in Janasthana were killed."

"Here too is the virtuous Lakshamana, resembling the most excellent elephant among
elephants, in the path of whose arrows, even Indra the Lord of celestials himself could not
survive

"Sweta and Jyotirmukha, the sons of the sun-god, a monkey called Hemakuta, another
son of Varuna, Nila the son of Visvakarma the strong and the best of monkeys, as well as that
mighty and swift Durdhara the son of Vasus are all here."

"There is the prince of demons Vibhishana, your brother, who having secured the city
of Lanka (as a prospective gift from Rama) remains devoted to the good of Rama."

"Thus, I have described about the entire army of monkeys stationed on the Mount
Suvela. Now, it is for you to decide what remains to be done!"
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the harsh words with indignation, spoken by Rama, which caused her hair to
stand on end, Seetha became very much perturbed.

Hearing the terrific words of her husband, which were never actually heard by her
before, amidst a large gathering of people, Seetha stood bent low with shame.

As though her own limbs were pierced by those words, which were arrow-like with
pointed splinters, Seetha shed profuse tears.

Then, wiping clean her face, which was bathed in tears, she spoke the following
words slowly, in a stammering voice to her husband.

"O valiant Rama! Why are you speaking such harsh words, which are violent to hear
for me, like a common man speaking to a common woman?"

"O the long-armed one! I am not the one in the way you understand me. Have a faith
in me. I swear to you by my own character."

"By the conduct of vulgar woman you distrust the entire race of women. Give up this
doubt, if I have been actually tested (and found trustworthy) by you."

"O lord! It was not my willfulness, when I came into contact with the person of
Ravana. I was helpless. My adverse fate was to blame on that score."

"My heart, which was subservient to me, was abiding in you. What could I do,
helpless as I was, with regard to my limbs which had fallen under the sway of another?"

"O bestower of honour! If I could not be fully known to you, in spite of our love
having simultaneously grown and despite of our having lived together, I am ruined permanently by
such ignorance."

"O king! Hanuma, the great hero, was sent by you as your search-agent. Why I, who
was still in Lanka, was not abandoned then itself?"

"O hero! Life would have been given up by me, when deserted by you; immediately on
hearing the message (conveying your desertion) before the eyes of the monkey."

"This wasteful endeavour (in the form of crossing over to Lanka and waging war
against the mighty Ravana, keeping your life in jeopardy), would not have been there, nor would
have your friends been put to such fruitless hardship."

"O excellent king! You, however, like a feeble man, gave priority to womanliness,
conforming yourself to just an emotion of anger."

"O knower of virtuous conduct! My birth was from Janaka in disguise; but was
actually from the earth. My sacred birth of such a high degree, was not honoured by you."

"My hand taken (by you as a bride) in our childhood was not duly recognized by you.
My devotion, my chastity and all have been ignored by you."

Seetha, thus speaking, weeping and stammering with tears, said to Lakshmana, who was
sad and engaged in thoughtfulness (as follows):

"O Lakshmana! Create a pile of fire, for me, which is a remedy for this disaster. I
no longer wish to survive, smitten as am with false blames."

"I will enter a fire, to obtain the only course appropriate for me, who has been
abandoned amidst an assembly of men, by my husband who was not satisfied with my traits."

Hearing the words of Seetha, Lakshmana, the destroyer of enemy warriors, giving way
to wrath, looked towards Rama.

Understanding the inclination of the mind of Rama, hinted by the expression in his
face, that valiant Lakshmana prepared a pyre, in deference to the wishes of Rama.

No one near and dear was indeed able to cajole on that occasion or to speak or even
to look upon Rama, who appeared like Yama the lord of death at the time of dissolution of the
world.

Thereupon, Seetha, after doing circumambulation to Rama, who was standing with his
head bent low, proceeded towards the blazing fire.

Having offered salutation to gods and brahmins as also having joined her palms in
the vicinity of the fire, Seetha spoke the following words:

"As my heart never moves off from Rama, so let the fire-god, the witness of the
world, protect me from all sides."

"As Rama apprehends me, though of unimpeachable conduct, to be spoilt, let the
fire-god the witness of the world protect me from all sides."

"As I have never been unfaithful in act, thought and speech to Rama, who knows all
the virtues, so let the fire-god protect me."

"Since the adorable sun-god, wind-god, the four quarters and even so the moon-god,
as also the deity presiding over the day-time and the twilights and the night and the earth and
even others know me to be endowed with good conduct, so let the fire-god protect me."

Thus speaking, Seetha walking around the fire-god, with her mind free from
hesitation, entered the blazing fire.

A large gathering of men including children and elders, saw the shining Seetha
having entered the fire there.

That Seetha, with the shining of fresh refined gold and decked with ornaments of
refined gold, plunged into the blazing fire, in the presence of all people.

All the living beings saw then that wide-eyed Seetha, who looked like a golden
altar, plunging into the fire.

The sages, gods, and the Gandharvas saw that illustrious Seetha entering deep into
the fire as a sacred oblation of clarified butter.

All the women (who were present there) screamed on seeing her, rushing into the
fire, like a gush of clarified butter plunging into the sacrificial fire, duly consecrated by Vedic
hymns.

The denizens of the entire three worlds including the gods, Gandharvas and demons,
beheld her falling into the fire, like a goddess, subjected to a curse, falling from heaven to
hell.

While she was entering deeply into the fire, a loud sound, which appeared strange,
uttering 'Alas, Alas' rose both from the demons and the monkeys alike.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing that Vajradamshtra was killed by Angada, Ravana spoke the following words to
the General of his forces who, with joined palms, stood near him.

"Let the invincible demons of irresistible courage go forth soon, with Akampana as
their head, who is skilled in the use of every weapon and missile."

"This excellent demon is a chastiser, a protector and a leader in battle. He ever
desired my welfare and always loved war."

"There is no doubt that he will prove victorious and Rama, Lakshmana, the mighty
Sugreeva and the other terrible monkeys."

Taking that command of Ravana, the mighty Akampana of quick resolution then
mobilized the army.

Those foremost of demons of terrifying appearance, furnished with every kind of
weapon and fearful to look upon, rushed into the fray where their general had dispatched them.

Then, Akampana of the stature and colour of a cloud, whose voice resembled a
thunder, ascended his great chariot, decorated with fine gold and set out, surrounded by dreadful
demons.

Even celestials were indeed unable to upset Akampana in a great battle. Hence, among
the demons, he was shining like the sun, by his splendour.

As he sped on his way, hastened and eager to enter the battle, the horses drawing
his chariot were suddenly deprived of their energy.

The left eye of Akampana, who delighted in warfare, began to twitch. His countenance
grew pale and his voice trembled.

At a time of a good day, marked by fine weather, it turned into a day of bad weather
with a bitter wind beginning to blow. Birds and beasts uttered cruel and fearful cries.

That demon, who had the shoulders of a lion and the agility of a tiger, disregarding
those portents, rushed towards the battle-field.

While Akampana advanced thus with his troops, an immense tumult arose that seemed to
convulse the ocean.

By hearing that clamour of the demons coming for the battle, the huge army of the
monkeys, brandishing trees and rocks, was frightened.

A highly fierce battle ensued between those monkeys and demons, who were ready to
lose their lives for the sake of Rama and Ravana.

All the monkeys and demons, who were willing to kill each other, were very strong
and valiant. All were resembling mountains.

The tremendous clamour of the aforesaid warriors, yelling in their rage and
strength, making savage cries, were distinctly heard on the battle-field.

A highly terrific dust, in a thick coppery colour, raised by the monkeys and demons
enveloped all the ten quarters.

The combatants, enveloped by that dust, which was whitish like a piece of silk
shaken by the wind, could no longer distinguish each other on the battle-field.

Neither standard, banner and shield, nor horse, weapon and chariot could be
discerned in that pall of dust.

A great tumultuous clamour, of warriors, making challenging cries and rushing upon
each other, was heard on the battle-field, yet in that confusion, no form was visible.

In the darkness, the greatly enraged monkeys killed the monkeys themselves and the
demons killed the demons themselves in battle.

Those monkeys and demons killing other and their own people then made the earth
dampened with blood, anointing its body with mud.

Under the stream of blood being sprinkled, the dust was laid, revealing the earth
covered with bodies and corpses.

The demons and the monkeys vigorously struck each other swiftly with blows from
trees, spears, maces, javelins, stones, bars and picks.

The monkeys of dreadful deeds, resembling mountains, fighting with their arms
appearing like iron bars, killed the demons in battle.

The enraged demons with darts and javelins in their hands, struck the monkeys there
with their cruel weapons.

The extremely enraged Akampana, the general of the army of demons, cheered all those
demons by his terrible prowess.

The monkeys however leaping upon them and snatching their weapons through their
strength, crushed those demons with blows from large trees and stones.

Meanwhile Kumuda, Nala and Mainda the courageous monkeys in an outburst of anger,
displayed unsuprassed rashness.

Those exceedingly valiant chiefs of monkeys, as in sport, in the battle-front, with
mighty blows of trees, created a great carnage among the demons. All of them repeatedly crushed the
demons with every kind of weapon.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Vibhishana, wishing victory to Rama, (the destroyer of adversaries) who having
reposed during the previous night and had risen fresh, spoke to him with joined palms, the
following words:

"These women with lotus-like eyes, who are skilled in the art of decoration, came
with bathing accessories like garments, ornaments, sandal-pastes and beautiful garlands of various
kinds. They will assist you in bathing O Rama!"

Hearing the words of Vibhishana, Rama replied as follows: "You invite the monkeys
headed by Sugreeva for the bath."

"That Bharata, the virtuous man, who was accustomed to comfort, a delicate youth,
the great-armed and the one consistent with the truth is suffering on my account."

In the absence of Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, who is practicing virtue, ritual
bathing, garments and jewels are not to my liking."

"See how we may return to that City of Ayodhya soon. It is indeed very difficult to
travel over this path to reach Ayodhya City, so soon."

Hearing the words of Rama, Vibhishana replied : "O prince! I will get you t that
City in a day."

"O Rama of unequalled prowess! The aerial car shining like the sun, which moves as
one pleases, wonderful and excellent, named Pushpaka of Kubera my brother was robbed by the mighty
Ravana after conquering Kubera in battle. May prosperity attend you! It is retained there for your
sake."

"The yonder aerial car, looking like a cloud, stands here and by which transport,
you can reach Ayodhya without any trouble."

"O sagacious prince! If I deserve to be treated with kindness by you, if you think
of any virtue in me and if you think of any virtue in me and if you have any affection in me, stay
here for some more time."

"O Rama! When you have been offered with reference all the entertainments, you along
with Lakshmana, your brother and Seetha your consort, shall then depart."

"O Rama! In the meantime, accept you, with your entire army and assemblage of
friends, my hospitality which has been fixed and arranged by me, full of affection as I am."

"O Rama! I entreat you with affection, respect and friendship I am your servant. I
am not in any way commanding you to do so."

Hearing those words, Rama replied to Vibhishana as follows, while all the demons and
the monkeys present there, listened:

"O destroyer of enemies! O hero! I stand honoured by you by your valued counsel,
your efforts put forth with your whole soul and more so by your friendship.

"O king of demons! It is not that I am not carrying out your words. But, my heart is
hastening to see that Bharata, my brother."

"My heart is hastening to see that Bharata, who came all the way to Mount Chitrakuta
to take me back to Ayodhya, yet whose appeal was not executed by me, even though he requested me
with his head bent low and Kausalya my mother as also Sumitra and the illustrious Kaikeyi (my
step-mothers) as also Guha my friend, as well as the citizens of Ayodhya and the inhabitants of the
country-side."

"O gentle Vibhishana! Allow me to go. I am honoured. O friend! You need not be
disappointed, I entreat you."

"O the king of demons! Fetch the aerial car immediately. How is it advisable for my
continued stay here, now that my task has been accomplished?"

Hearing the words of Rama, Vibhishana the king of demons then hastily invoked the
presence of that aerial car shining like the sun, with colourful parts made of gold, with the
platform made of cat's-eye gems, which was full of attics, shone like silver on all sides,
decorated well with white flags and flag-staff, decked with gold and golden lotuses, graced with
golden mansions, hung all over with networks of tiny bells, giving forth a melodious sound on all
sides, resembling a summit of Mount Meru, built by Vishvakarma, which was graced with stately
palaces decked with pearls and silver, provided with pavements inlaid with crystal, furnished with
excellent seats of cat's eye gems of great value and upholstered with highly valuable
coverings.

Informing Rama that the said aerial car which could not be assailed and was as swift
as though- had arrived, Vibhishana stood there.

The generous minded Rama along with Lakshmana felt amazed to see the aforesaid
aerial car, Pushpaka, which resembled a mountain and which could travel everywhere at will, arrived
on that occasion.
undefined
undefined
undefined

As approved by Rama, that excellent aerial car, with images of swan painted on it,
flew into the sky, with a great sound.

Casting his look on all sides, Rama, the delight of Raghu dynasty, then spoke to
Seetha, who had a moon-like face (as follows):

"O Seetha! Look at the City of Lanka, resting firmly on the mount of Trikuta,
looking like a peak of Mount Kailasa and built by Viswarakarma, the universal architect."

"O Seetha! Look at this great battle-field, covered with a mud of flesh and blood as
also a cause for the death of monkeys and demons."

"O the large-eyed Seetha! Here lies Ravana, the king of demons, the tormentator of
people, on whom boons were conferred by Brahma and who was killed by me for your sake."

"Here, Kumbhakarna and Prahasta the demon were killed. Here, Dhumraksha was killed
by Hanuma, the monkey."

"Here was Vidyunmali killed by the great-souled Sushena and here was Indrajit, the
son of Ravana, killed by Lakshmana in a combat."

"Here was killed a demon called Vikata by Angada. Virupaksha, who was disagreeable
to the sight, Mahaparsva, Mahodara, Akampana, Trishiras, Atikaya Devantaka, Narantaka and other
mighty demons were also killed here."

"Both Yuddonmatta and Matta, the foremost of demons, as also Nikumbha and Kumbha the
sons of Kumbhakarna, as also the strong Vajradamshtra, Damshtra and many demons were killed.
Makaraksha, the most difficult demon to be attacked, was struck down by me in this
battle-field."

"Akampana was killed in the great battle. The valiant Shonitaksha was also killed.
Yupaksa and Prajangha were killed."

"Here, Vidyujjihva, the demon was a terrific appearance, was killed. Yajnashatru
also was killed. The mighty Suptaghna was killed. Surya shatru was killed and another demon called
Brahma shatru was too killed."

"Here, surrounded by more than a thousand fellow-wives, Ravana's wife named
Mandodari lamented for Ravana."

"O Seetha, the lovely-faced one! Here is seen a water-descent of the ocean on the
sea-shore, where having crossed the ocean, we spent that night."

"O the large-eyed Seetha! Here is the bridge called Nala Setu, which was so
difficult to execute for others, got built by me over the salt-sea for your sake."

"O Seetha! See this roaring imperturbable and seemingly boundless ocean, the
habitation of Varuna (the god of waters), which is teeming well with couches and
oyster-shells."

"O Seetha! See the golden mountain, Mainaka (the ruler of mountains) which rose
passing through the ocean, in order to provide rest and relaxation to Hanuma."

"See this island, located in the middle of the ocean, where my troops were
stationed. At this place, the lord Shiva (the supreme deity) formerly bestowed his grace on
me."

"Here is seen the water-descent of the gigantic ocean, called a Setubandha, adored
in all the three worlds. This is very much a sacred spot, capable of washing away major sins. At
this very place, Vibhishana the king of demons first came."

"O Seetha! Here is seen the beautiful City of Sugreeva, Kishkindha, which is full of
colourful groves, where Vali was killed by me."

Seeing the City of Kishkindha, which was earlier ruled by Vali, Seetha, who was
feeling timid through love, then spoke the following courteous words to Rama.

"O king! I wish to reach the capital City of Ayodhya along with you, accompanied by
the wives of other monkey-chiefs with Tara and other beloved wives of Sugreeva."

Hearing the words of Seetha, Rama then said to her in reply "let it be". Reaching
Kishkindha, causing the aerial car to halt, and looking at Sugreeva, Rama spoke to him the
following words:

"O the king of monkeys! Instruct all the monkey-chiefs to come to Ayodhya in the
company of their wives."

"O the mighty Sugreeva, the King of monkeys! You too hasten to depart, taking the
wives of all the monkeys "we shall proceed."

Hearing the words of Rama of great splendour, that illustrious Sugreeva, the lord of
monkeys accompanied by all those monkeys, quickly entering his gynaecium, spoke to Tara as
follows:

"O the beloved lady! You have been permitted by Rama to proceed to Ayodhya, in the
company of the wives of the great-souled monkeys, with an intent to gratify Seetha."

"You hurry up, to proceed to Ayodhya, with the wives of the monkeys. We shall show
Ayodhya and all the widows of Dasaratha to them."

Hearing the words of Sugreeva, Tara, who was charming of every limb, called all the
spouses of the monkeys and spoke to them as follows:

"Duly permitted by Sugreeva and all the monkeys, hurry up to proceed to Ayodhya. A
kindly act will be done to me too, through the sight of Ayodhya (which is so dear to me)."

"We shall also see the entry of Rama into Ayodhya, along with the people of that
city as well as the inhabitants of the country-side, as also the affluence of the widows of
Dasaratha."

Duly permitted by Tara, all the wives of the monkeys, wearing their costumes as per
rule and going round the aerial car clockwise, ascended it with an intent to see Seetha.

Seeing the aerial car having risen quickly, after having taken the wives of monkeys
too, Rama again spoke to Seetha at the vicinity of Mount Rishyamuka (as follows):

"O Seetha! Here is seen Rishyamuka, the excellent mountain, endowed with layers of
gold and looking like a cloud with lightning."

"O Seetha! Here did I meet Sugreeva, the king of monkeys and an agreement too was
made by me for the killing of Vali."

"Here is seen Pampa-river, abounding in lotuses and edged with colourful groves,
where I lamented with great pain, having been separated from you."

"The virtuous Shabari was seen by me at the bank of this river. Here was killed,
Kabandha, having arms, a Yojana (eight miles) long."

"And over there is seen in the forest of Janasthana, O Seetha, that illustrious tree
under which the highly brilliant and mighty Jatayu, the foremost among the birds, was killed by
Ravana, for your sake, O sporting lady!."

"O lady of beautiful complexion! Here is the region, (known as Panchavati, so called
because it consists of five banyan trees) where Khara the demon was killed by me with
straight-going arrows, as also his brothers, Dushana and the mighty Trishiras. And over there is
seen our enchanting leaf-hut, where you were forcibly taken away by Ravana the king of demons, O
charming lady!"

"Here is the shining hermitage of Sutikshna, the great-souled sage. And over there
is seen the great hermitage of Sharabhanga, where the thousand-eyed Indra, the destroyer of
Citadels, came."

"Here is the shining hermitage of Sutikshna, the great-souled sage. And over there
is seen the great hermitage of Sharabhanga, where the thousand-eed Indra, the destroyer of
Citadels, came."

"O slender-waisted lady! Here are seen those sages, where, Atri the head of the
hermitage, was equal in splendour to the sun and the fire."

"At this place, the gigantic Viradha was killed by me. O Seetha! Here was seen by
you, the virtuous Anasuya, the ascetic lady (the wife of sage, Atri)."

"O Seetha, having a beautiful body! Here is Chitrakuta, the excellent mountain,
shining. Bharata came here to seek my favour (in the form of my consent to return to Ayodhya)."

"O Seetha! Here is seen the beautiful river of Yamuna, surrounded by colourful
groves. Here is seen the illustrious hermitage of Sage Bharadwaja."

"Here is seen the holy River Ganga, which wends its way through the three worlds
(viz. heaven, the earth and the subterranean world), whose banks are crowded with flocks of birds
and which is lined with trees in full-flowering."

"Here is the town of Shringaberapura, where Guha my friend stays. Here is seen that
river, Sarayu, lined with rows of sacrificial posts (the relics of sacrifices performed from time
to time by Ikshvaku dynasty), bordered with hundreds of trees and with groves in full blossom."

"O Seetha! Here is seen that Capital City of my father. O the princess of Videha
territory! Having duly returned, offer your salutation to Ayodhya."

Thereupon, all those monkeys and the rejoiced demons along with Vibhishana, at that
time, bounding again and again (to have a glimpse of it) saw that City.

Thereupon, the monkeys along with the demons beheld that Ayodhya, having rows of
white palaces, intersected with wide roads, and crowded with elephants and horses, looking like
Amaravathi, the City of Indra the lord of Celestials.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the death of Dhumraksha, Ravana the King of demons was possessed of anger
and began to hiss like a serpent. Polluted by anger, with long and burning sighs, he addressed the
cruel and mighty Vajradamshtra, a demon (as follows)

"O, warrior! Go ahead as the head of the demons and slay Rama the son of Dasaratha,
as also Sugreeva and his monkeys!"

"So it be" answered the leader of the demons who was a conjurer and departed with
many divisions of the army that surrounded him. With the utmost attention, he assembled teams of
elephants, horses mules camels and chariots adorning them with conspicuous flags and banners and he
himself was well-prepared.

Adorned with colourful bracelets and a diadem, Vajradamshtra set out immediately,
wielding a bow and well-covered by an armour.

That army-general circumambulated and ascended his chariot, duly decorated with
flags and shiningly adorned with purpose.

Infantry of every kind issued forth, furnished in their hands with weapons such as
clubs, excellent javelins, smooth pestles, harpoons, bows, lances, spears, swords, discus, maces
and sharp axes.

All those excellent demons in their resplendent and coloured uniforms, full of
strength and mounted on elephants furious with rut, resembled moving mountains.

All those excellent demons in their resplendent and coloured uniforms, full of
strength and mounted on elephants furious with rut, resembled moving mountains.

That whole army of demons paraded, looking as brilliant as the clouds, with
lightning and sound in the rainy season. They emerged from the southern gate where the General
Angada is stationed.

While those demons set forth, inauspicious portents appeared. From a cloudless yet
burning sky, meteors fell. Fearful jackals, emitting their howls, belched forth flames and
fire.

The dreadful beasts then foretold destruction of demons, who while entering the
combat, stumbled miserably.

Ever after seeing these portents Vajradamshtra of exceeding prowess and sharpness,
shored up courage and being fond of battle, set out for the combat.

The monkeys, burning for victory, seeing their enemies advancing, made tremendous
shouts which echoed every quarter.

Thereafter, a tumultuous battle ensured between the monkeys and the demons, who were
cruel, of ferocious form and desirous of each other's destruction.

Some warriors of great energy, coming for war, their necks, and bodies severed, fell
to the surface of the earth, their entire bodies bathed in blood.

Some other warriors, who did not turn back in battle, with arms resembling steel,
approached one another, attacking with various kinds of weapons.

An extremely great and terrible noise, breaking the hearts, was heard there from
trees, rocks and weapons.

A terrific noise of the wheel-rims of chariots and the bow, along with the
tumultuous sounds of couches, kettle-drums and tabours arose there.

Some demons, leaving weapons, performed battle with their arms. The demons were
beaten and their bodies made fragmented by the monkeys of fighting arrogance, with their palms,
feet, fists, trees and knees. Some demons were crushed to powder with rocks.

Tremendously frightening the monkeys in the battle by his arrows, Vajradamshtra
moved himself in the battle-field like Yama the God of Death moving at the time of dissolution of
the worlds, wielding a noose in his hand.

The strong demons skilled in weaponry and wielding various kinds of weapons, killed
the army of monkeys in that battle, with their increased anger.

The courageous Angada the son of Vali, twice possessed of anger, killed all those
demons in the battle, like a world-destroying fire.

The valiant Angada with his raging red eyes lifted a tree and killed all those troop
of demons, like a lion killing small animals. Angada, with his prowess resembling that of Indra the
Lord of celestials, brought about a terrific destroyer of the enemies.

The terribly strong demons, struck by Angada there, had their heads shattered and
fell down like chopped off trees.

The earth then appeared fearful, it being covered with chariots, conspicuous flags,
horses, bodies of monkeys and demons with streams of blood flowing there.

That battle-field, decorated with necklaces, bracelets worn on upper arm, garments
and umbrellas looked like an autumnal night.

By the swiftness of Angada, that great army of demons there trembled then, like a
cloud by the swiftness of wind.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Approaching Rama standing absorbed in fight in the battle-field, exhausted as he was
by the fight, and seeing Ravana who came nearby, facing him duly prepared for the battle, the
glorious sage, Agastya, who had come together with the gods, to perceive the battle, then spoke as
foolows:

"O Rama, the mighty armed! Hear the following eternal secret, by which you can
conquer all the enemies in battle, my child!"

"Worship the sun-god, the ruler of the worlds, who is crowned with the rays, who
appears at the horizon, who is greeted by the gods and the demons alike, shines forth; covering up
all other lights and brings light to the world."

"He is the embodiment of all gods, full of glory and the reflector of rays. He
protects the multitude of gods and demons as well as their worlds by his rays."

"He is Brahma the creator, Vishnu the protector of the Universe, Lord Shiva the god
of destruction, Skanda (son of Lord Shiva), Prajapati (the ten lords of creted beings), Indra the
ruler of gods, Kubera the bestower of riches, Kala the Time-spirit, Yama the god of retribution,
Soma the moon-god and Varuna the ruler of the waters."

"The Pitrus (manes), the eight Vasus, the twelve Sadhyas, the two Ashvins the
physicians of gods, the fortymine Maruts (wind-gods), Manu (a progenitor of the human race), Vayu
the wind-god, the fire-god, the created beings, the life-breath of the universe, the source of teh
seasons and the store-house of light."

"An off-spring of Aditi, the progenitor of all, Surya the sun-god and the provocator
of acts in people, the courser in the sky, the nourisher of all iwth rain, the possessor of rays
the golden, the brilliant, having golden seed whose energy constitutes the seed of the universe and
the maker of the day."

"He has seven green horses, is thousand-rayed, full of rays, the destroyer of
darkness, the source of happiness, maker of thinness, the infuser of life in the lifeless cosmic
egg and radiant."

"He is a golden foetus, maker of coolness, creator of heat, the bringer of a day,
the one who is eulogized by all, pregnant with fire, the son of Aditi, the one who pacifies himself
in the evening and the destroyer of frost."

"He is the lord of the sky, the disperser of darkness, the master of the three Vedas
(Viz. Rik, Sama and Yajur), the sender of thick rain, the friend of water and the on who courses
swiftly in the path of the sky."

"He is the radiator of heat and adrned with a circle of rays. He is death himself,
tawny of hue, a giver of warmth to all, omniscent, all-formed, endowed with extra-ordinary
splendour, the one who has an affection in all and the source of all evolutes."

"He is the controller of all lunar mansions, planets and stars, the creator of all
and the resplendent among the splendid. O god, appearing in twelve forms (in the shape of twelve
months in a year), hail to you."

"Hail to you in the form of eastern mountain and hail to the western mountain. Hail
to the lord of host of luminaries and hail to the lord of the day."

"Hail to you, the giver of victory, hail to you, the joy born of victory! Hail to
you, the god with green horses, hail to you, having thousands of rays! Hail, hail to you the son of
Aditi!

"Hail to you, the fierce one, hail to you the valiant one! Hail to you, the one with
variegated colours! Hail to you, the awakener of the louts, hail to you, the furious one!"

"Hail to you, the ruler of Brahma, Lord Shiva and Lord Vishnu the infallible, the
sun-god, the light indwelling the solar orb, the resplendent one, the devourer of all, appearing in
form of Rudra."

"Hail to you, the dispeller of darkness, the destroyer of cold, the exterminator of
foes, the one whose extent in immeasurable, the destroyer of the ungrateful, the god, who is the
ruler of all lights."

"Hail to you, possessing the lustre of refined gold, the dispeller of ignorance, the
architect of the universe, the uprooter of darkness, the splendour incarnate, the onlooker of the
world!'"

"This sun, the lord alone destroys and brings into existence all the brings. He
radiates heat by his rays. He sends the rain."

"Planted in all created beings, he remains awake, when they have fallen asleep. He
alone is the oblation to the fire-god and the fruit attained by those who pour such oblations."

"He comprises all the gods, as well as the sacrifies as also the fruit of all
sacrifices. He is a supremely competent one of all activities, which are found in all the
worlds."

"O Rama! No individual glorifying this sun-god, in distresses in difficulties; in
the woods or in times of peril, comes to grief."

"Worship this sun-god, the lord of the universe and the god of all gods with
undivided attention. Muttering this praise three times, you will come out victorious in
battles."

"You will be able to kill Ravana at this very moment, O mighty armed one!" Saying
so, the sage, Agastya, thereupon, left as in the same way as he had come.

Hearing this, Rama of extra ordinary energy, then became bereft of anguish. Feeling
greatly delighted, Rama retained that hymn in his memory with a devoted mind.

Sipping the water thrice and getting purified looking intently on the orb of the sun
and repeating this prayer, the valiant Rama obtained a great rejoice. Seizing hold of his bow and
seeing Ravana, Rama felt delighted in mind and marched forward for the fight. He stood voed to kill
Ravana, with an intense and all-sided effort.

Seeing Rama with a delighted mind, and becoming most exhildrated on foreseeing the
death of Ravana, the sun-god, standing in the middle of a troop of celestials, exclaimed, "Hasten
up."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing the bewildered Seetha, a demon named Sarama*, an affectionate female
companion then approached Seetha, her beloved Seetha, her beloved friend.

Sarama, the soft-spoken woman, consoled Seetha who having been infatuated by Ravana
was very much in distress.

Sarma, who was assigned by Ravana to guard Seetha, was kind hearted and firm in
austerity. She was indeed made a companion by Seetha, who was being protected by her there.

The affectionate Sarama found Seetha stupefied and just risen after rolling in the
dust and soiled, resembling a female horse.

Sarama consoled the very virtuous Seetha as follows "O, Seetha! Be comfortable! Do
not get perturbed in your mind.

timid woman! Because of my friendship with you, I overheard Ravana's words and all
the words you have spoken in reply to him, by hiding nearby in a barren sky without fear. O, large
eyed woman! I do not have any fear of Ravana, owing to my affection towards you".

"O, Seetha! Every thing was ascertained by me on the spot, after going out, about
the reason for which Ravana has gone away agitated."

"It is not possible to attack Rama, a man of self awareness, while he is asleep. Nay
even killing him, the tiger among men, is well nigh impossible."

"It is not possible to kill in this manner even monkeys, who perform fighting with
trees, in as much as they are fully protected by Rama, even as celestials are protected by Indra
their lord"

"O, Seetha! Rama, who is endowed with long and well rounded arms, an illustrious
man, who is large-chested, a man of great energy, an archer well known in the world, a man endowed
with muscularity, a righteous minded man, a person of celebrity on earth, a man of eternal
strength, a protector for himself and for others, while together with his brother Lakshmana, a man
of high descent, a knower of doctrines of conduct and behavior, the killer of a stream of enemy
forces, a man of inconceivable strength and valor, a venerable man and an annihilator of
adversaries, has not been killed."

"A trickery has been hurled on you here by the cruel Ravana, a conjurer, who is
perverse in thinking and action and an enemy of all beings."

"Your sorrow is (now) gone once for all. An all-pervading auspiciousness will await
you. Accordingly prosperity will attend on you. Hear me."

"Rama, along with his army of monkeys, having crossed the ocean, reached its
southern shore and is encamped there."

"Rama, who was along with fully meaningful Lakshmana, was perceived by me. He stands
protected by the troops gathered together at the vicinity of the ocean."

"Some swift paced demons, who were dispatched by Ravana, brought this very news here
that Rama has crossed the ocean."

"O, the wide-eyed Seetha! Hearing that news, yonder Ravana is busy making
deliberations with all his ministers."

While Sarama, the ogre was talking as aforesaid with Seetha; a terrific sound was
heard, from the troops engaged in the impending war.

Hearing the crashing sound of kettle drums, made to sound like a thunder storm with
a drum stick, Sarama in her sweet voice spoke to Seetha as follows:

"O, timid Seetha! This frightful sound of a kettledrum is indeed indicative of
preparation for a war. Hear also the thundering crash of the kettle drums, which resembles the
rumbling of clouds"

"Elephants in rut are being caparisoned for war. Chariot horses are being prepared
for a battle. Thousands of horsemen carrying darts in their hands are seen."

"Thousands of soldiers equipped with armor are marching quickly hither and thither.
Royal highways are filled with wonderfully looking warriors like a swift flowing sea with its flood
of waters making a roaring sound."

"See hurriedly, this sheen of polished weapons, shields and coats of mail sending
forth luster of many hues like the splendor of fire consuming a forest in summer. Here is seen the
flurry of chariots, horses and elephants following the lead of Ravana as well as of energetic
demons thrilled with joy."

"Hear the sound of bells of elephants. Hear the ratting of chariots. Hear the cry of
neighing horses, resembling the flourish of trumpets. Here is the bustle of demons, carrying
uplifted weapons in their hands; following the lead of Ravana. This bustling activity is causing
hair to stand erect through terror."

"A good fortune, which will bring your sorrow to an end, awaits you. A peril has
arrived for demons. The lotus eyed Rama, your husband, who has overcome his anger but having an
unimaginable strength will kill Ravana in battle and win you back"

"Your consort along with Lakshmana will show his valor against the demons, like
Indra the lord of celestials along with Vishnu the lord of preservation, the annihilator of enemies
exhibited his strength over his adversaries."

"Very soon, I shall see you, mounted on the lap of Rama who actually arrived, your
object of his coming being fulfilled and the enemy fallen."

"O, Seetha! You will shed tears of joy on the bosom of that broad-chested Rama, re-
united with you and holding you clasped to his breast."

"Before long, O divine Seetha, that mighty Rama will loosen the one single plait
which has reached past your hips, which you have worn these many months."

"O, Queen! Seeing his face, looking like a rising moon, you will renounce your tears
born of grief, like a female snake casts off its slough."

"O, Seetha! Having killed Ravana in combat within no time, Rama (who deserves
facility); will enjoy happiness in the company of the beloved, namely yourself."

Acclaimed by the high soled Rama, you will be so happy as how the earth, endowed
with crops, feels after the onset of good rains."

"O, queen! Seek refuge now with him - the sun that rolls towards Meru the highest
mountain, like a horse that makes its round rapidly. That sun is indeed the source of all
creatures."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the cries of these who were thus wailing, the virtuous minded Rama then
became thoughtful for a while, afflicted as he was with melancholy, his eyes filled with tears.

Thereupon, Kubera the King of Yakshas, Yama the lord of death together with the
deceased ancestors, Indra the lord of celestials Varuna the lord of waters, the illustrious Shiva
the great deity who bears the device of a bull as his banner and having three eyes, Brahma the
creator of all the worlds and the best among the knowers of sacred knowledge all these together
reaching the City of Lanka in aerial cars, shining like the sun approached Rama.

Lifting their long arms, their hands decked with ornaments, those excellent gods
thereupon, spoke (as follows) to Rama who stood there, making a respectful salutation to them with
his folded hands.

"How do you, the maker of the entire cosmos, the foremost among those endowed with
knowledge and an all-capable person, ignore Seetha who is falling into the fire? How do you not
recognize yourself to be the foremost of the troop of gods?"

"Among the Vasus (a class of gods, eight in number), you are the Vasu, named
R^itadhama (one whose abode is Truth or the Divine Law) who was formerly the self-constituted
ruler, the first creator of all the three worlds and the lord of creatures."

"You are the eighth Rudra among (eleven) Rudras and the fifth (Viryavan by name)
among the Sadhyas (a particular class of celestials belonging to Gana Devata). The twin Aswinis are
your ears. The sun and the moon constitute your eyes."

"O the destroyer of the adversaries. You are seen (to exist) at the beginning and at
the end of creation. Yet, you ignore Seetha, just like a common man."

Hearing the words of those guardians of the world, Rama, the lord of creation, who
was born in Raghu dynasty and the foremost one among protectors of righteousness, spoke to those
god-chiefs as follows:

"I think of myself to be a human being, by name Rama, the son of Dasaratha. You, as
a gracious Divinity, tell me that which I as such really am like this."

Hearing the words of Rama, Brahma (the creator), the foremost among the knowers of
Brahma the Absolute, spoke as follows: "Listen to my true word, O the truly brave lord!"

"You are the Lord Narayana himself the glorious god, who wields the discus. You are
the Divine Boar with a single tusk, the conqueror of your past and future enemies."

"You are Brahma, the imperishable, the Truth abiding in the middle as well as at the
end of the universe. You are the supreme righteousness of people, whose powers go everywhere. You
are the four-armed."

"You are the wielder of a bow called Sarnga, the lord of the senses, the supreme
soul of the universe, the best of men, the invincible, the wielder of a sword named Nandaka, the
all-pervader, the bestower of happiness to the earth and endowed with great might."

"You are the leader of the army and the village headman. You are the intellect. You
are the endurance and the subduer of the senses. You are the origin and the dissolution of all,
Upendra the Divine Dwarf and (the younger brother of Indra) as also the destroyer Madhu, the
demon."

"You perform action for Indra the lord of celestials, the Supreme Ruler, the one
having a lotus in one's navel and who puts an end to all in battle. The divine sages pronounce you
to be fit to afford protection to all and the refuge for all."

"In the form of the Vedas, you are the great Bull with hundred heads (rules) and
thousand horns (precepts). You are the first creator of all, the three worlds, and the self
constituted Lord of all. You are the refuge and the forbear of Siddhas (a class of demi-gods
endowed with mystic powers by virtue of their very birth) and Sadhyas (a class of celestial
beings.)"

"You are the sacrificial performance. You are the sacred syllable 'Vashat' (on
hearing which the Adhvaryu priest casts the oblation to a deity into the sacrificial fire). You are
the mystic syllable 'OM'. You are higher than the highest. People neither know your end nor your
origin nor who you are in reality."

"You appear in all created beings in the cattle and in brahmanas. You exist in all
quarters, in the sky, in mountains and in rivers."

"With thousand feet, with hundred heads and with thousand eyes along with Lakshmi
the goddess of wealth, you bear the earth with all its created beings along with its
mountains."

"O Rama! You appear as Sesha, a large serpent in water, at the earth's bottom,
bearing the three worlds, gods, Gandharvas, the celestial musicians and the demons."

"O Rama! I (brahma) am your heart. Saraswathi, the goddess (of learning) is your
tongue. O lord! The gods created by Brahma are the hair on all your limbs."

"Night has been recognized as the closing of your eye-lids and the day, as the
opening of eye-lids. The correct usages of your words are the Vedas. Bereft of you, this visible
universe does not exist."

"The entire cosmos is your body. The earth constitutes your firmness. Fire is your
anger. The moon constitutes your placidity. You are Lord Vishnu (who bears the mark Srivatsa - a
curl of white hair on his breast)."

"In the past, the three worlds were occupied by you in your three strides, after
binding the exceptionally formidable Bali (the ruler of the three worlds) and Indra was made the
king (by you)."

"Seetha is no other than Goddess Lakshmi (the divine consort of Lord Vishnu), while
you are Lord Vishnu. You are having a shining dark-blue hue. You are the Lord of created beings.
For the destruction of Ravana, you entered a human body here, on this earth."

"O Rama, the foremost among the supporters of righteousness! The aforesaid purpose
of ours has been fulfilled. Ravana has been killed. Return to your divine abode, with a
rejoice."

"O Lord! Unerring is your valour. Your exploits are never in vain. O Rama! Your
blessed sight is powerful. The songs in praise of you never go in vain."

"Those humans who are full of devotion to you will never be unsuccessful on this
earth. Those who are devoted to you, the primeval and the eternal lord, belonging to ancient times
and the Supreme Person, will forever attain their desired objects here as well as hereafter."

"Humiliation will never be the plight of those humans who will recite this hymn in a
divine ancient history, sung by Brahma, the foremost seer."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing Lakshmana and Indrajit, fighting with commitment to gain victory one over the
other, like elephants in rut, that strong and valiant Vibhishana, wielding his excellent bow, stood
there at the battle-front, with an intent to behold their combat.

Standing there thus, Vibhishana stretched his great bow and released excellent sharp
pointed arrow son those demons.

Falling in exact spot, those arrows, hitting like fire, tore the demons into peices,
as thunderbolts would cleave large mountains.

Even the foremost of demons, the attendants of Vibhishana too, rent asunder those
valiant demns in battle, with pikes, sowrds and sharp-edged spears.

Surrounded by those demons, Vibhishana shone like an elephant in the midst of proud
young tuskers.

Vibhishana, who knew the timing, spoke to the monkeys, who cherished to destroy the
demons, the following opportune words duly inspiring them.

"O cheifs of monkeys! Here stands before you, one who is the last support of Ravana.
He is all that is left in his force. Why do you stand idle?"

"At the end of this war, if this sinful demon is killed, the remaining army is as
good as killed, except Ravana."

Prahasta was killed. The valiant Nikumbha, the mighty Kumbhakarna, Kumbha, the demon
called Dhumraksha, Jambumali, Mahamali, the highly swift Ashaniprabha, Suptaghna, Yajnakopa, a
demon named Vajradamshtra, Samhadri, Vikata the destroyer of enemies, Tapana, Manda, Praghaasa,
Praghasa, PrajaN^gha, JaN^ga, Agniketu who was difficult to be conquered, Agniketu, the valiant
Rashmiketu, vidyujjihva, Dvijihva, Suryashatru, Akampana, Suparshva, Chakramali, Kampana and the
mighty Devantaka were also killed."

Having killed these many mighty and foremost of demons and having swun the ocen, let
the tiny puddle be crossed.

"O monkeys! Only this much of army remains yet to be conquered here. All the demons,
who were proud of their strength, having come to the battle-field here, were killed by you."

"Driving away tenderness, for the sake of Rama, I will kill my own brother's son
though being his uncle (who is as good as a father), it is not appropriate for me to compose his
death."

"My eyes are getting cluded with tear, even when I think of killing him. This
long-armed Lakshmana alone will finish him. O Monkeys! All of you, together, kill his servents
standing beside him."

Thus impelled by that illustrious Vibhishana, those monkey-chiefs were rejoiced and
lashed their tails (in a happy mood).

Then, those monkeys-cheifs, roaring time and again, emitted various kinds of sounds
resembling the sounds of peacocks at the time of seeing the clouds.

Even Jambavan and those monkeys, accompanied by all those, who belong to their
identical troops, began to strike the demons with stones, nails and teeth.

Those mighty demons, having various kinds of weapons, abandoning their fear,
surrounded that Jambavan, who was playing havoc on them.

They struck Jambavan, who was killing the army of demons in battle, with sharp axes,
spears with sharp edges, sticks and javelins.

That tumultuous and terrific battle accompanied by a great noise, occured between
the monkeys and the demons as between enraged celestials and demons.

That haughty Hanuma too who felt enraged, causing Lakshmana to descend from his
back, and tearing up Sala tree from a mountain, approached the demons and himself began to destroy
those demons in their thousands.

That mighty Indrajit, the destroyer valiant enemies, after giving a tumultuous fight
to his uncle, yet again rushed towards Lakshmana.

The two valiant celebreties, Lakshmana and Indrajit, the two intense fighters in
battle, then began to strike each other, showering a multitude of arrows on their enemies.

The mighty and energetic Lakshmana and Indrajit covered each other off exceedingly
by a network of arrows, in the same way as the sun and the moon are veiled by clouds at the end of
summer.

Due to lightness of their hands, even as they fight there, neither the holding of
the bow, nor the taking off the arrows, nor fitting them on their bow-string, nor adjusting their
fists, nor drawing the bow-string nor attaining the target was visible.

The sky, having been covered by a multitude of arrows, on all sides, discharged with
force by them both, was shrouded in darkness.

Meeting Indrajit, Lakshmana fought with him. Meeting Lakshmana, Indrajit too took
the offensive. As they clashed with each other, there was terrible confusion (as to who would win
ultimately).

By the sharp arrows released almost continuously with the sky was covered with
darkness.

By the fall of a multitude of their sharp arrows in hundreds, the quarters and
sub-quarters were filled with arrows.

All the space was covered with darkness, showing up great fear. While the sun was
setting down, encircling darkness all over, large streams of blood in plenty poured out.

Cruel and carnivorous animals diffused awful sounds with their roaring noise. Wind
did not blow at that time nor the wind blazed up.

Those great sages proclaimed, "May it be well for the (three) worlds!" The
frightened Gandharvas the celestial musicians along with Charanas, the wandering singers arrived
there to see tha battle-field.

By discharging four arrows, Lakshmana then struck four black gold-adorned horses of
Indrajit.

Thereupon, with alacrity of his hand, that illustrious Lakshmana, fully stretching
and releasing another sharp thunderbolt-like arrow, named Bhalla, which was yellowish in colour,
with charming plumes, having a good splendour similar to Indra's thunderbolt and echoing a clapping
sound, severed the head of Indrajit's charioteer from his trunk, even as he was circling
around.

When the charioteer was killed, the greatly splendoured Indrajit did the
charioteering by himself and also took hold of his bow.

For them, who saw his capability in that battle, it looked wonderful. When he was
driving his horses, Lakshmana struck him with sharp arrows. When he was attending to his bow, he
released arrows on horses.

Lakshmana, who was swift in his acts, tormented Indrajit who was ranging the
battle-field fearlessly, with a multitude of arrows on such opportune occasions.

Seeing his charioteer killed in battle, Indrajit became dejected and los this
entusiasm in undertaking the combat.

Seeing Indrajit with a despondent face, the monkey-chiefs were very much dejected
and then acclaimed Lakshmana.

Then, four monkey-leaders named Pramathi, Rabhasa, Sharabha and Gandhamadana,
getting impatient, acted hastily.

Those four mokeys, having a great might and terrible prowess, quickly bounced and
descended on his ecellent horses.

Blood started flowing from the mouths of those horses pressed under the weight of
those monkeys, as huge as mountains.

Those crushed orses, with their limbs broken as also moving to and fro, fell down
dead on the ground. After killing his hrses, those monkeys also crushed that great chariot and
jumping up again with speed, they stood by the side of Lakshmana.

That Indrajit; hatasaarathiH= whose charioteer was killed hataashvaat= and whose
horses were destroyed; avaplutya= leaped down; rathaat= from his chariot; abhyadhaavata= and
attacked; saumitrim= Lakshmana; sharavarSheNa= with streams of arrows.

Then, that Lakshmana like Indra the lord of celestials, restrained those arrows with
many a number of his arrows. That Indrajit was coming on foot, as his excellent ohrses had been
killed and began to release exquisite sharp arrows in battle.
undefined
undefined
undefined

On seeing Markaraksha come out, all those chiefs of monkeys, leaping all at once,
took their positions, with intent to give fight.

Thereafter, a very great battle ensued between monkeys and demons, which caused
one's hair to bristle, like the encounter between celestials and demons.

The monkeys and demons then, by hurling trees and spikes and by throwing maces and
clubs, began to crush each other.

Those demons, who were prowlers of might, made a slaughter of the lions among the
monkeys, by means of their javelins, swords, maces, spears, lances, sharp edged spears, Bhindipalas
(slings for throwing stones), nooses, mallets, staffs, missiles and other weapons and by throwing
arrows on all sides.

Tormented by Makaraksha with a multitude of arrows, all the monkeys were bewildered
in mind, agonized with fear and ran away.

On seeing those monkeys fleeing, all the arrogant demons roared like lions, assuming
a triumphant feeling.

While those monkeys were fleeing on all sides, Rama then, with a shower of arrows,
intercepted those demons on that occasion.

Seeing Rama thus interrupting the demons, Makaraksha, the demon, engrossed in a fire
of anger, spoke the following words:

"Pause, O Rama! You will have a dual with me. I will make your life to quit, by the
sharp arrows discharged from my bow."

"Since you killed my father on that day in Dandaka forest, my anger is still growing
violent, when I think of you engaged in such nefarious acts".

"O evil minded Rama! Since you were not being seen by me from that time in that
large forest, my limbs were getting very much fumed."

"By a good fortune, you came into my sight here, O Rama! You are being sought by me,
as a lion in hunger seeks other animal to eat."

"Now, by the flight of my arrows, you will go to the world of Death and reside there
with those warriors, who were killed by you earlier."

"O Rama! What is the use, by telling too much on this topic? Hear my words. All the
worlds will look at you and me, in this battle-front."

"O Rama! The battle will proceed in the battle-field, either with the weapons, or
with a mace or by our arms or by any other means as learnt by you."

Hearing the words of Makaraksha, Rama the son of Dasaratha laughingly spoke the
following words to him, who was still talking further and further (without interruption).

"O demon! Why are you boasting yourself with so many unworthy words, in vain?
Without fighting in the battle-field, it is well nigh impossible for you to attain victory with the
strength of a mere speech."

"I killed fourteen thousand demons along with Khara your father, Trishira and even
Dushana in Dandaka forest."

"O sinful one! Today, vultures jackals and crows with their sharp beaks and
goad-like claws will be satiated with your flesh."

Hearing Rama's words, the mighty Makaraksha discharged a multitude of arrows on that
Rama in the battle-field.

Rama tore those arrows in many ways, by his array of arrows. Those arrows, which
were provided with golden shafts, fell to the ground, when torn in thousands.

That battle raged furiously, on their meeting each other there, between Makaraksha
the son of Khara the demon and Rama the son of Dasaratha.

Then, the sound emanated by the bows, with a great resonance, was heard on the
battle-front, like the rumbling of clouds in space.

With an intent to see that wonderful battle, all the celestials, the demons, the
celestial musicians kinnaras the mythical beings and Mahoragas the great serpents reached the
sky.

Though the limbs of both were pierced by each other, their strength was redoubled.
The two warriors inflicted wounds on each other, returned the blows of the other in the
battle-front and continued the combat.

In the battle, that demon broke the multitude of arrows discharged by Rama. Rama
snapped off, in many ways, the arrows released by the demon.

All the four quarters and the intermediate points were diffused with a multitude of
arrows. Even the earth was covered on all sides and did not become visible.

Then, the long-armed Rama, full of anger in battle, broke off the bow of the demon.
Thereupon, by his eight iron arrows, struck the charioteer.

Rama, breaking the chariot with his arrows and killing its horses, made them to fall
down dead. That Makaraksha the demon, bereft of his chariot, stood on the ground.

That demon, standing on the ground, took into his hand, a spike, which created
fright among all living beings and whose splendour was equal to the fire at the end of the
world.

That great spike, which was difficult to be obtained, was gifted to him by Rudra,
one of the eight forms of Shiva the Lord of Dissolution. That terrible spike, which flamed
violently in the sky, looked like another new weapon of destruction of the world. On seeing it, all
the godheads were afflicted with fear and fled to different quarters.

Brandishing that flaming great spike, that enraged demon hurled it against that
great-souled rama.

Rama broke, by his four arrows, that flaming spike coming forth from Makaraksha's
arm and rushing towards him in the sky.

That spike, adored with charming gold, broken in many ways, struck by Rama's arrows,
fell scattered on the earth, like a mighty meteor.

Seeing that spike struck by Rama, who was unwearied in action, the beings standing
in the air, cried, saying 'Excellent, Excellent!'.

Seeing that spike destroyed, Makaraksha the demon, rising his fist, called out to
Rama, saying "Wait, Wait!".

Then, seeing Makaraksha rushing towards him, that Rama the delight of Raghu dynasty,
while smiling, fitted to his bow, a mystic missile presided over by fire.

Struck by that missile by Rama, the demon with his heart split open, fell down dead
then and there, in the battle-field.

Seeing the fall of Makaraksha, all those demons, tormented by the fear of Rama's
arrows, ran away straight to Lanka.

Thrilled with delight, the celestials watched that demon, the son of Khara,
destroyed by the flights of Rama's arrows and resembling a mountain shattered, after struck by
lightning.
undefined
undefined
undefined

The battle-field there, on its part, was strewn on that occasion with those monkeys
whose bodies had thus been torn asunder by Ravana with his arrows.

Those monkeys could not bear that irresistible descent of arrows loosed by Ravana,
any more than moths would bear a blazing fire.

Those monkeys tormented by sharp arrows, fled away roaring, as elephants run away,
when enveloped in flames of fire and getting scorched by them.

Ravana was marching forward swiftly in that battle-field, blowing away the army of
monkeys, like the wind blows away large clouds.

Having brought about with his might the destruction of those monkeys in battle,
Ravana quickly approached Rama on the battle-field.

Seeing those monkeys running away in defeat in that battle, Sugreeva kept Sushena in
charge of his army and quickly threw his mind into the fight.

Keeping that Sushena who was equal to himself, his substitute, that Sugreeva, armed
with the tree as a weapon, marched forward towards the enemy.

Taking huge rocks and various kinds of trees, all the monkey-warriors followed
Sugreeva at his side and behind.

The gigantic Sugreeva roared at a high pitch in the battle-field. Striking with his
blows, he crushed various other chiefs of demons.

The colossal bodied Sugreeva smashed the demons, as the grown-up trees are smashed
by the wind at the time of dissolution of the world.

Sugreeva rained a hail of rocks on the army of demons, as a cloud rains a shower of
hail-stones on a host of birds in a forest.

While those demons, thus defeated by Sugreeva, falling on the floor and then
roaring, get diminished in number from all sides, the indomitable Virupaksha the demon, holding a
bow, pronouncing his name by himself, descended from his chariot and mounted the back of an
elephant.

That mighty Virupaksha, mounting that elephant, then roared a terrific noise and
rushed towards the monkeys.

Virupaksha released dreadful arrows on Sugreeva who was at the front-rank of the
army. He strengthened his support to the worried demons, by cheering them up.

Sugreeva, the king of monkeys, when he was struck severely with sharp arrows by that
demon, shouted loudly. With profuse anger, he set his mind on killing him.

Uplifting a tree and coming near that huge elephant, the valiant Sugreeva, a
thorough fighter, struck it on its face.

That huge elephant, struck with the blow of Sugreeva, receded to a distance of four
yards, sank down and roared too.

Descending quickly from his wounded elephant, that valiant demon then seizing hold
of his sword from a shield made of a bull's hide and advancing in rapid paces, facing towards
Sugreeva his enemy, approached him, who stood firm, threatening him as it were.

Taking a huge rock, which looked like a cloud, that Sugreeva, who felt enraged,
threw it on Virupaksha.

Seeing that rock falling, that highly valiant and excellent of demons then receding
away, struck him with a sword.

Wounded by the blow of the sword of that strong demon, Sugreeva became as though
unconscious on the ground, for a moment.

Then, bouncing up suddenly in that great battle, Sugreeva, tightening his fist,
brought it down on the demon's chest violently.

Feeling enraged, when struck by the blow of that fist, Virupaksha the demon brought
down the armour of Sugreeva by his sword at the battle-front. Thus struck by him, Sugreeva fell
down from his feet.

Getting up when fallen, Sugreeva gave him a slap, which produced a terrific sound
similar to a thunder.

Setting himself free from that slap, which was about to be raised by Sugreeva
skillfully, Virupaksha the demon struck Sugreeva on the chest with his fist.

Then, seeing that demon escaping his blow, Sugreeva the monkey-king for his part,
very much enraged.

That monkey saw an opportunity to strike that Virupaksha. Then, with anger, Sugreeva
brought down another violent slap on his temple-bone.

Virupaksha, struck by the blow of that palm, which was like the thunderbolt to the
ground, oozing blood profusely from the (nine) apertures* of his body, as water flows from the
spring.

The monkeys saw Virupaksha, bathed in foaming blood, with his eyes rolling through
anger and as such rendered all the more deformed.*

The monkeys saw their enemy, bathed in blood, turning to and from as also throbbing
on his sides and roaring piteously.

Confronting together in the battle-field in that way, those two violent and terrific
armies which were extensive as oceans, of monkeys and demons, roared like two large oceans which
had burst their bounds.

Beholding that mighty Virupaksha killed by Sugreeva, the army of monkeys and demons
together looked like the agitated river of Ganga.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing that very great exploit executed by the chiefs of monkeys in the battle,
Akampana was seized with a fierce anger.

Witnessing that work of the enemies, his features were distorted by anger and
brandishing his powerful bow, Akampana addressed his charioteer in these words.

"Drive the chariot quickly to that place, for, those monkeys are killing innumerable
demons on the battle field."

"Those arrogant monkeys of terrific ferocity, armed with trees and rocks, dare to
affront me here."

"I wish to kill those andicious monkeys, who are seen herassing all the army of
demons."

Thereafter, in his chariot, drawn by fast-moving horses, Akampana the most skillful
of chariot-warriors, with a hail of darts, assailed the monkeys from a distance.

The monkeys were no longer able to maintain their formation, much less fight in the
battle. all of them were crushed under the shifts of Akampana and took to their heels.

Seeing those companions, getting under the sway of death pursued by Akampana's
darts, the mighty Hanuman went to their rescue.

Seeing Hanuman their great leader, all those valiant and the best of the monkeys
together rallied and grouped themselves boldly round him.

Observing Hanuman's courage, those excellent monkeys took shelter in his
powerfulness and became powerfulness and became powerful indeed.

Akampana, like Mahendra the Lord of celestials, assailed a hail of arrows on
Hanuman, who remained as firm as a rock.

Heedless of the flood of weapons that fell upon his body, the mighty Hanuman
resolved in his mind to slay Akampana.

Laughing heartily , that Hanuman, the son of Maruta the wind-god and possessing a
great splendour, leapt on the demon, causing the earth to shake as it were.

As he roared burning with energy, the form of Hanuman became difficult to overpower,
like a blazing fire.

Knowing himself to be bereft of any weapon, Hanuman the excellent monkey, with a
rage, uplifted a mountain quickly.

That valiant Hanuman, seizing a very great mountain with one hand and letting up a
roar, began to spin it rapidly.

Thereafter, as formerly in an encounter Indra the Lord of celestials hurled his
thunderbolt at Namuchi, Hanuman rushed towards Akampana.

Beholding that crag flying towards him, Akampana shattered it even from a distance
by means of his great crescent-shaped arrows.

Seeing that rocky peak shatterd in the air by the demon's arrows and falling in
pieces, Hanuman became mad with anger.

Approaching an Ashwakarna tree as large as a mountain, in the transport of rage that
possessed him, that Hanuman uprooted it speedily.

Taking hold of that Ashvakarna tree with large branches, in his great strength,
Hanuman with immense delight spinned it, while standing on the ground.

Then, the highly enraged Hanuman began to run with great strides, breaking down the
trees by his strength and tearing up the earth with his feet.

Hanuman struck down elephants as also who rode upon them and charioteers with their
chariots and the terrific infantry of demons.

Seeing that Hanuman, like unto Yama the Destroyer of vital Breaths, full of wrath
armed with a tree and taking off lives, the demons took of flight.

The valiant Akampana, beholding that Hanuman who was enraged and rushing on, sowing
terror among his soldiers, was greatly perturbed and set up a mighty shout.

With fourteen sharp arrows that tore the flesh, that Akampana pierced the highly
valiant Hanuman.

Riddled with sharp-pointed shafts, that warrior Hanuman appeared like a mountain on
which a number of plants shooted up.

That mighty Hanuman of great strength with a large body shone like a fire without
smoke and resembled a blooming Ashoka tree.

Thereafter, showing a great haste in uprooting another tree, Hanuman struck the head
of Akampana the General of demons.

Struck with a tree by that high-souled and enraged Hanuman, that demon fell down and
died.

Seeing their leader Akampana lying lifeless on earth, all the demons trembled as the
trees do during an earthquake.

All those defeated warriors, throwing their arms, escaped in the direction of Lanka,
terrified, pursued by those monkeys.

Their hair loosened, bewildered, their pride broken by defeat, their limbs dripping
with sweat, those demons fled, blowing out their breaths.

Mad with fear, looking back again and again and crushing each other in haste, they
entered the city.

When those demons had entered Lanka, all the mighty monkeys approached Hanuman and
paid homage to him.

That Hanuman, of noble nature honoured all those delighted monkeys, in accord with
their rank and the occasion.

The triumphant monkeys shouted in accord with their nighty and once again dragged
the demons who were still alive there on the battle-field.

That great monkey, born of Maruta having encountered and killed the demons, enjoyed
the same renown as Vishnu when he overcame the mighty and terrific demon of immense power
destroying his enemies in the forefront of the battle.

Then, the troops of deities along with Rama himself, the exceedingly strong
Lakshmana, Sugreeva and other monkeys and the mighty Vibhishana paid homage to Hanuman.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then, Nikumbha, Rabhasa, the exceedingly strong Surya satru, Suptaghna, Yaj~akopa,
Mahaparsva and Mahodara, the unconquerable demons Agniketu and Rasmiketu, then the powerful son of
Ravana named Indrajit endowed with great energy, Prahasta and Virupaksha, Vajradamstra who was
extraordinarily strong, Dhumarksha and Atikaya and the demon by name Durmukha, carrying iron clubs,
sharp-edged spears, spikes, darts, javelins and axes, bows with excellent arrows and swords shining
like a vast expanse of water, and who were all extremely enraged, and flaming as it were with
glory, those demons rose up and spoke to Ravana (as follows).

"Now itself, we shall kill Rama along with Lakshmana and Sugreeva as well as the
pitiable Hanuma by whom Lanka was attacked."

Vibhishana (Ravana's youngest half-brother) restraining all those who were made to
seize weapons, were made to sit again by saluting them with joined palms and spoke as follows:

"Dear brother! That act which cannot be accomplished by three well-known strategies
(viz . conciliation, gift and sowing dissention) , is only then to be accomplished by exhibiting
prowess, as stated by wise men."

"The gallantries performed according to the prescribed precept, after being tested,
O dear brother, only succeed against those who are indifferent, who have been already attacked by
an enemy or who stand struck down by fate."

"How do you wish to attack that famous Rama, who is always attentive, who has a will
to conquer, who is established in strength, who has subdued his anger and who is difficult to be
conquered."

"Who can conceive or even imagine in this world, that Hanuma's speed in crossing the
formidable ocean, which is the lord of streams and rivers?"

"O, demons! The strength and the abilities of the enemies are difficult to be
measured. They cannot be treated with contempt hastily by any means."

"What offence was done earlier to the king of demons by the illustrious Rama, whose
wife that he bore away from Janasthana?"

"Khara, who has gone beyond limits, was of course killed by Rama in an encounter.
Lives are certainly to be protected, according to one's own strength, by living beings."

"For this reason, a very great danger because of Seetha will occur to us. She, who
was brought here, is to be given away. What is the use in doing anything, with an animosity as an
end?"

"It is not appropriate to make enmity uselessly with Rama, who is valiant and who
follows righteousness. Let Seetha be given away to him."

Before the City of Lanka with its elephants, horses and many riches are shattered by
arrows, let Seetha be given away to him."

"Not so long as the huge army of monkeys which is very dangerous and unconquerable
attacks our Lanka, let Seetha be given away."

"If the beloved wife of Rama is not given away of your own accord, the city of Lanka
will indeed perish. All our valiant demons too will Perish."

"I am propitiating you because of my relationship. Act on my words. I am telling you
beneficial as well as truthful word. Let Seetha be given away to him."

"Before Rama the prince discharges for your destruction, very strong and unfailing
arrows equal to the rays of autumnal sun and provided with new heads and shafts, let Seetha be
given away to Rama."

"Abandon soon your anger, which destroys happiness and piety. Resort to
righteousness, which augments joy and fame. Become placid so that we may live with our sons and
relatives. Let Seetha be given away to Rama."

After hearing Vibhishana's words, Ravana the king of demons left all of them and
entered his own palace.
undefined
undefined
undefined

While Lakshmana, who was so fond of his brother, was consoling Rama, Vibhishana,
keeping the troops of simian army in their respective positions, arrived there.

That Vibhishana, surrounded by four warriors, wielding many types of weapons, and
who were chiefs of troops, looking like heaps of black collyrium and who were appearing like
elephants, approached Lakshmana who was totally engrossed in sorrow and saw the monkeys also, whose
eyes were filled with tears.

Vibhishana also saw the great-souled Rama, the delight of Inkshvaku dynasty fallen
into a swoon and resting on the lap of Lakshmana.

On seeing the embarrassed Rama, tormented with grief, that Vibhishana, distressed as
he was in spirits, with agony inside, asked him, "What is this?"

Fixing his gaze on Vibhishana's face and looking at Sugreeva and those monkeys,
Lakshmana with tears pouring down, spoke the following words, with a splendid meaning:

"O gentle Sir! Just on hearing through the words of Hanuma, saying that Seetha was
killed by Indrajit, Rama entered into a swoon."

Intercepting the narrating Lakshmana in the middle, Vibhishana spoke the following
amply meaningful words to Rama, who was in an unconscious state.

"I hold that which you have been told by Hanuma with a sorrowful temper, O ruler of
men, to be absurd as the drying up of the sea."

"O the long armed! I know the design of the evil-minded Ravana towards Seetha. He
would never do the killing of Seetha."

"Eventhough begged by me, the well-wisher, several times to give up Seetha, he did
not heed that advice."

"It is neither possible even to see her by recourse to conciliation nor by bestowing
gifts nor by sowing dissention. How is it possible then by a war? By any other strategy, it is
impossible."

"That Indrajit for his part retracted, by hoodwinking the monkeys. O the long armed!
Know that Seetha (who was seemingly killed by him) as illusory."

"After reaching a sanctuary by name Nikumbhila, this Indrajit will pour oblations
into the sacred fire. On returning after pouring oblations into the sacred fire, Indrajit will
prove difficult to be overcome in battle, even by celestials including Indra."

"Certainly, this conjuring trick (in the form of killing an illusory living effigy
of Seetha) was exhibited by him, who was employing his magical art, expecting interruption by the
prowess of the monkeys there."

"While the sacrificial performance is not ended, we shall proceed to that place,
along with an army. O the foremost of men! Give up this improper grief, which has come upon you.
Seeing you tormented with grief, the entire army is sinking into despondency."

"Very exalted as you are in courage, stay you here, confident at heart, and send
Lakshmana with us, who are taking an army along with us."

"This Lakshmana, the eminent prince, can make Indrajit abandon that act of
sacrifice, by employing his sharp arrows. Then, he will be susceptible of being killed."

"Lakshmana's arrows, which are sharp and fiery, with a speed equal to the wings of a
bird, can drink his blood like cruel birds."

"O the long-armed one! Therefore, dispatch Lakshmana having auspicious body-marks
even as Indra the lord of celestials employed the thunderbolt to kill Indrajit."

"O the best of men! It is not appropriate to delay the killing of the enemy any
further now. Therefore, grant permission to Lakshmana to destroy the enemy, as Indra would hurl his
thunderbolt to destroy the enemies of celestials."

"If that Indrajit, the foremost of demons completes the sacrifice, he would not be
visible even to the celestials and the demons in battle. If he come with a desire to fight, after
ending that sacrifice, the celestials also will feel a great suspicion on their own lives."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Thereafter, surveying the earth and the sky, the monkeys beheld the brothers Rama
and Lakshmana, covered with arrows.

Then, along with Sugreeva, Vibhishana came to that place, after Indrajit finished
his work and retired; even as Indra* would, after raining.

Nila, Dvivida, Mainda, Sushena, kumuda, Angada along with Hanuman forthwith began to
grieve for Rama and Lakshmana.

Breathing but faintly, bathed in blood; riddled with innumerable arrows, motionless
and lying inactive, they lay stretched on a bed of arrows, sighing like serpants, helpless, having
little prowess, their limbs smeared with a stream of blood, resembling two golden standards, and
lying on heroes' couch, those warriors with tardy movement of their limbs, were surrounded by their
monkey-leaders, whose eyes were suffused with tears. Seeing the two Raghavas, pierced by a
multitude of arrows, all the monkeys along with Vibhishana became perturbed.

The monkeys surveyed all the quarters in the sky, without being able to discover
Indrajit (the son of Ravana), who was veiled by his magic powers in the fight.

Vibhishana, beholding by his magic arts, saw that nephew, standing nearby, duly
hidden by his occult power.

Althought that warrior who had no peer in the field and who had unique exploits, had
made himself invisible by virtue of the boon he had received, he was recognized by Vibhishana, who
was full of energy, glory and prowess.

Contemplating his own feat, Indrajit gazed on those two warriors, stretched on the
earth and in excess of joy, wishing to share it with all the demons, said.

"The exceedingly strong brothers Rama and Lakshmana, the killers of Khara and
Dushana have been killed by my arrows."

"Even were they aided by the gods and demons with the host of sages, these two
brothers would never be able to release themselves from those arrows that paralyse them."

"This non- sensical pest, which was wearing away the very roots of us all, on whose
account, the three watches of the night slipped past my father, who is unable even to touch his
couch with his limbs, who remains absorbed in thought and stricken with grief and because of whom,
the entire city of Lanka remains agitated, like a river during the rains, has ban destroyed by
me."

"As clouds are useless in the autumn, so are all the exploits of Rama, Lakshmana and
all the monkeys."

Thus speaking to all those demons, Indrajit the son of Ravana (by his arrows0 struck
the monkey chief.

Striking Nila with nine arrows, Indrajit the destroyer of foes tormented Mainda and
Dvivida with three superb arrows on each.

Indrajit the wielder of a great bow smacked the chest-region of Jambavan with an
arrow and released ten arrows towards Hanuman, the swift monkey.

Indrajit the son of Ravana of great swiftness, struck both Gavaksha and Sharabha of
unbounded valour with two arrows on each of them, in that battle.

Thereafter, Indrajit the son of Ravana swiftly with his various arrows, struck
Gavaksha (the ruler of golangulas) and then Angada the son of Vali too.

Indrajit, that strong and highly courageous demons, pierced those jewels among the
monkeys there with his arrows which resembled flames of fire and began to shout in triumph.

Tormenting them with a multitude of arrows and frightening the monkeys, the mighty
armed Indrajit heartily laughed and spoke (as follows).

"O, demons! At the forefront of the army, behold those two brothers (Rama and
Lakshmana) bound together by me by a terrible net work of my arrows."

All those demons, the treacherous fighters on their part, after hearing the words of
Indrajit, were seized with a great wonder and were overjoyed.

All of them cheered Indrajit unanimously with a roar like unto thunder, crying "Rama
is dead".

Seeing the two brothers - Rama and Lakshmana lying motionless and breathless on the
floor, Indrajit thought they were dead.

Indrajit, full of joy and victorious in conflict, returned to Lanka, spreading
happiness among the demons.

Seeing Rama and Lakshmana riddle with arrows and pierced in every limb and bone of
their bodies, a great fear had taken possession of Sugreeva.

Vibhishana then spoke to that Sugreeva, who was frightened, whose eyes were filled
with tears, looking helpless and whose eyes were agitated in grief.

"Have no fear, O Sugreeva! Stay this rush of tears. Wars are like this. Victory is
not certain."

"O, warrior! If a remnance of luck is there with us, the highly-souled and the
exceedingly strong Rama and Lakshmana will drive off this loss of consciousness."

"O, Sugreeva! Be courageous and bring about courage in me, having no protector. For
those who are devoted to truth and righteousness, there is no fear of death."

Thus speaking, Vibhishana then wiped the charming eyes of Sugreeva with his hand
moistened in water.

Then, the pious minded Vibhishana took water, enchanted it with an incantation and
wiped the eyes of Sugreeva.

Having dried the face of the wise Sugreeva Vibhishana spoke the following words full
of good sense and comfort.

"O, Sugreeva the king of monkeys! This is not the time to cling to despondency. At
this hour, even too much attachment leads to death."

"Therefore, abandoning your despair, which ruins all actions, focus now on how best
to serve the troops which have Rama going before them.

"Or else, let Rama be protected till he regains consciousness. Having regained
consciousness, Rama and Lakshmana can indeed drive away the fear of both of us."

"This is nothing to Rama nor Rama is going to die. The bodily splendour, which is
difficult to be found in those whose longevity of life has run out; is not abandoning him."

"Therefore console yourself and call on your prowess, till I restore confidence in
the entire ranks."

"O, the foremost of monkeys! These monkeys, having their eyes dilated due to fear,
are signaling some words into each other's ear, terrified as they were."

"Let the monkeys cast off their fear, even as one would discard a used garland, on
seeing me running about to activate the troops."

Having emboldened Sugreeva, Vibhishana the foremost of demons once again reassured
that army of monkeys, who were pushing away.

Indrajit, the great conjurer, surrounded by all his forces, re-entered the city of
Lanka.

Approaching Ravana there and saluting with joined palms, Indrajit informed his
father in pleasing words that both Rama and Lakshmana had been slain.

Hearing in the midst of demons, the news that both the enemies having been killed,
Ravana forthwith sprang on his feet in joy and embraced his son.

Smelling on his head, Ravana delighted at heard, made enquiries in the matter.
Indrajit reported the matter as it happened, to his enquiring father, as to how both Rama and
Lakshmana were made motion-less and luster-less by entwining them with arrows.

Hearing the words of Indrajit the great charioteer, Ravana with his heart filled
with a gush of joy, relinquished his anguish, caused on account of Rama and applauded his son with
pleasing words.
undefined
undefined
undefined
Agitated to learn that Rama had arrived to Lanka and is stationed at Suvela 
			mountain along with his army, Ravana confers with his ministers and after dismissing them, 
			approaches Seetha with Vidyujjuha, knower of conjuring tricks. Informing Seetha that her 
			husband along with his army had been killed in battle, he produces before her an illusive 
			Rama's head along with bow and arrows created with Vidyujjuha's conjuring trick. Thus, Ravana 
			deceives Seetha about the death of Rama.
The spies of king Ravana informed him that Rama with his imperturbable army 
			was encamped at Mount Suvela in Lanka.
Hearing through his spies that Rama with his mighty army had arrived to Lanka, 
			Ravana was a little agitated and spoke to his counsellors as follows:
"The time for deliberation has come to us. Let our ministerial colleagues 
			come quickly with their keenly attentive minds."
As per his command, the ministers came instantly. Ravana conferred with the 
			ogres, his ministers.
The dreadful Ravana discussed about the ensuing things to be done immediately. 
			He sent away the ministers and entered his palace.
Thereafter, Ravana the practiser of conjuring tricks, took the exceedingly 
			strong Vidyujjihva who was a great sourcerer along with him and went to Seetha's place.
Ravana the lord of demons spoke to Vidyujjihva, who was a knower of conjuring 
			tricks as follows: "With your spells, create an illusion in order to deceive Seetha, daughter 
			of Janaka."
"O, demon! Produce a head resembling Rama's along with a great bow and arrows 
			created deceptively and present yourself before me."
Hearing Ravana's words, the demon Vidyujjihva said, "Be it so". He showed 
			to Ravana those things of his conjuring trick, well-performed. The king became satisfied 
			of his work and gave him an ornament (as a gift).
The exceedingly strong Ravana the suzerain lord of demons, duly entered the 
			Ashoka grove, eagerly longing for the sight of Seetha.
Then, Ravana the younger brother of Kubera ( the god of riches) saw Seetha 
			the unfortunate one, who did not deserve that fate, seated on the ground with her head bent 
			down in the Ashoka grove plunged in grief as she was and absorbed in the thought of her 
			husband.
Then, approaching Seetha who was attended upon by ghastly ogresses seated 
			not far distance from her and mentioning his own name with great delight, Ravana spoke the 
			following audacious words to Seetha.
"O, Beautiful one! He in whom you trusted and repelled me when I sought to 
			console you - that murderer of Khara, your husband Rama has been killed in battle."
"O, Seetha! Your root has been cut off in all ways by me and your pride has 
			been slain. By your present evil predicament, you will become my wife."
"O, Foolish one! Give up this resolution. What will you do with one dead. 
			O, beautiful one! Become the Chief Queen over all my consorts."
"O, Foolish one, with scant virtue and failed purpose! You think yourself 
			as wise! O, Seetha! Hear about the dreadful killing of your husband in battle, as the killing 
			of the demon Vritra (at the hands of Indra)"
"Rama, encircled by an extensive army led forward by Sugreeva, is said to 
			have arrived at the sea-shore, to kill me."
"While sun was going to set, Rama with his mighty army was encamped there, 
			encroaching upon the northern shore of the sea."
"Their army stationed there, comfortably asleep at the middle of the night 
			and completely fatigued in the course of the journey, was approached first and espied by 
			our spies."
"By my great army, which was led by Prahasta, Rama's army was killed in the 
			night at the place where Rama and Lakshmana were there."
The demons wielding harpoons, maces, discus, daggers, sticks, great arrows 
			spears, shining maces with spikes, picks lances, darts, massed weapons, clubs and circular 
			missiles, made use of them again and again in order to strike down the monkeys."
"The impetuous Prahasta, with his steady hand, severed the head of Rama sleeping 
			there, with his mighty sword without a resistance from any one."
"Fortunately, Vibhishana was over leaped and held captive. Lakshmana along 
			with the monkeys were made to run away in all directions."
"O, Seetha! Sugreeva the king of monkeys with his neck broken and Hanuman 
			with his jaw removed were laid down and killed by the demons."
"Thereafter Jambavan who was rising up on his knees was killed in the battle. 
			His body was cut off with many sharp-edged spears, like a tree is cut off."
"Mainda and Dvivida - those two great scourgers of their foes, the long bodied 
			and the foremost of the monkeys, groaning and breathless, their limbs bathed in blood-were 
			cut to pieces at the waist-level, by a sword."
"Panasa, crying for help was stretched on the earth under a tree of the same 
			name. Pierced by lying in a pit. The exceedingly valiant kumuda on his part, shrieking, 
			was killed by a hail of missiles."
"Angada, who was adorned with bracelets lies fallen down, emitting blood 
			on all sides, as he was pierced by the demons with many arrows, after approaching him."
"The monkeys sleeping there were crushed by elephants and multitude of chariots, 
			like clouds are crushed to pieces by the velocity of wind."
"The enemy fled in terror, pursued by demons, while being struck on the bak, 
			like lions pursuing great elephants."
"Some monkeys fell in the sea and some sought shelter in the sky. The bears 
			with the monkeys climbed the trees."
"By the demons with monstrous eyes, were killed a multitude of monkeys, at 
			the shores of the sea, in the mountains an in the woods."
"Thus, your husband together with his army was killed by my troops. This 
			head, drenched in his blood and besmeared with dust has been gathered up."
Thereafter, Ravana the Lord of demons who was very much difficult to be attacked, 
			spoke the following words to an ogress, while Seetha was overhearing them.
"Bring Vidyujjihva, the demon of the cruel deed, by whom himself Raghava's 
			head was brought back from the battle-field."
Holding that head along with a bow, Vidyujjihva making a respectful salute 
			with his head bent low, stood in front of Ravana.
Thereafter, the king Ravana spoke the following words to Vidyujjihva, the 
			demon who had a large tongue and who was standing and moving closely.
"Keep Rama's head immediately in front of Seetha. Let the miserable Seetha 
			see well the final condition of her husband.
Hearing Ravana's words, that demon deposited the cherished head in the vicinity 
			of Seetha and soon disappeared from the site.
"Here is Rama's bow famous in the three worlds!" - saying thus, Ravana threw 
			a great shining bow in front of Seetha.
"This is the bow with its cord stretched, belonging to Rama, that was brought 
			back by Prahasta here, after killing that hero in the night."
That Rama's head and bow on the ground in front of Seetha the illustrious 
			daughter of Janaka, saying: "You now become submissive to my desire."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then, the demons there, approached Ravana and informed him that the city had been
besieged by Rama along with his monkeys.

Hearing that the city has been attacked, Ravana exhibiting his anger, doubly made
the necessary arrangements for the war and ascended his mansion.

That Ravana caught a glimpse of the city of Lanka, with its mountains, groves and
forests all being covered by innumerable troops of monkeys, waiting for war.

Seeing the earth made all brown with innumerable monkeys, Ravana in great perplexity
reflected: "How can they be exterminated?"

Having pondered for long, regaining his confidence and with his eyes widened by
surprise, Ravana gazed on Rama and his troops of monkeys.

Full of delight, Rama passed forward (on the back of a monkey) along with his army
and saw Lanka being guarded on all sides and thronged with demons.

Seeing that city of Lanka duly decorated with banners and flags, Rama remembered
Seetha with a distressed heart.

He said to himself, "Here is that daughter of Janaka, whose eyes resemble those of a
fawn, tormented with grief, emacitated, with a bare ground as her bed and suffering here on my
account."

Reflecting on Seetha being troubled, the virtuous Rama speedily issued a command to
the monkeys to destroy the enemies forthwith.

Hearing those words of Rama, who was unwearied in action, the monkeys vying with one
another filled the air with their roaring resembling those of lion.

"We shall tear asunder this Lanka with mountain-peaks or with fists alone." - thus
resolved all the monkey- generals.

Lifting up mountain peaks and huge rocks and plucking up various kinds of trees, the
monkey-generals stood prepared (for the attack).

In order to fulfill Rama's cherished desire, those troops, forming themselves into
columns, began to scale the heights of Lanka, while Ravana stood gazing.

Those monkeys, of golden hue with coppery countenance, fighting with Sala trees and
mountain-peaks, marched ahead towards the city of Lanka, ready as they were to lay down their lives
in Rama's service.

Those monkeys demolished innumerable defensive walls and arches with blows from
trees, mountain-tops and fists.

The monkeys filled the moats containing clear water with sands, mountain-tops,
grasses and logs of wood.

The commanders scaled the walls of Lanks, taking with them battalions of monkeys in
thousands, in crores and even hundreds of crores.

The monkeys stood tearing up the golden arches and breaking down the gates that
equaled the peak of Kailasa the mountainous abode of Shiva the Lord of Destruction.

The monkeys who resembled great elephants hurled themselves towards that Lanka,
springing, leaping and roaring.

The monkeys, who were able to change their form at will, shouting - "Victory to the
mighty Rama and the valiant Lakshmana!" "Victory of Sugreeva protected by Raghava!" and roaring,
rushed towards the defensive walls of Lanka.

Those monkey-generals Virabahu, Subahu, Nala and Panasa, having position on them.
Meanwhile, they formed an encampment of a multitude of military divisions there.

The mighty Kumuda, surrounded by a crore of monkeys, who behaved like conquerors,
stood besieging the eastern gate (while remaining stationed in north-east).

Surrounded by other monkeys, a monkey called Prasabha and the mighty armed Panasa
too up their position, in order to assist Kumuda himself.

The strong and valiant monkey, Shatabali accompanied by twenty crores of monkeys,
approached the southern gate (while remaining stationed in south-east) and stood there, to obstruct
the exit.

The mighty monkey named Sushena, the father of Tara (Vali's wife), going to the
western gate (while remaining stationed in the south-west) surrounded by crores and croes of
monkeys, stood besieging that gate.

Rama along with Lakshmana and Sugreeva the mighty lord of the monkeys, seeking the
northern gate (while remaining stationed in the north west) stood besieging that gate.

Accompanied by a crore of bears having terrific rage, Dhumra (brother of Jambavan,
the king of bears) of great prowess and the annihilator of enemies, took up his position by the
side of Rama.

Vibhishana of great energy with mace in hand, clad in defensive armour and
accompanied by his watchful ministers, took his position where the mighty Rama is stationed.

Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sharabha and Gandhamadana, galloping on all sides, defended the
army of monkeys.

Ravana the lord of demons with his mind filled in anger, then commanded for the
decamping of the entire army immediately.

At this command coming from Ravana lips, a tremendous clamour arose among the
demons.

By beating with sticks of gold, the demons stirred up on every side, kettle drums
whose discs were white as the moon.

Hundreds and thousands of sonorous couches blared forth, blown with their cheeks
extended to the full, by the most ghastly demons.

With their handsome limbs equipped with couches, those rangers of night shone like
clouds bordered with lightning accompanied by rows of cranes.

The battalions rushed forth under Ravana's instructions like the rushing forth of
the ocean, which is swollen by the clouds, at the time of universal dissolution.

Then, from every side a clamour, arose from the army of monkeys, which filled Malaya
mountain with its ridges, plains and caves.

The sound of couches and drums made by the demons and the leouine roars of those
monkey- warriors re-echoed over the earth, sky and sea.

With the trumpeting of elephants, the neighing of the horses, the clattering of the
chariot-wheels and the sounds of the foot-steps, the sound of the couches reechoed over the earth,
sky and sea.

In the meantime, a terrible struggle ensued between the demons and the monkeys, as
in the former times between celestials and demons.

Exhibiting their native prowess, the demons began to strike all the monkeys with
their flaming maces, spears, harpoons and axes.

Then, the gigantic monkeys swiftly struck those demons with trees, mountain-tops,
nails and teeth "Victorious is king Sugreeva" - thus arose a loud war-cry.

Then, some other terrifying demons on their part, shouting "Be winsome! Be
victorious!", proclaimed their own respective names. While some demons standing on walls hacked at
the monkeys standing on the ground (below) with hooks and harpoons.

The enraged monkeys, who wee standing on the ground, leapt into the air and dragged
down the demons stationed on the walls by seizing them with their arms.

That tumultuous combat between demons and monkeys transformed into a wonder, leaving
a mire of flesh and blood.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing of Akampana's killing, Ravana the Lord of demons, with a little depressed
face, was enraged and looked towards his ministers.

Having reflected awhile and deliberated with his ministers, Ravana the king of
Demons then passed that forenoon in inspecting his defenses in the City of Lanka.

The king Ravana saw that City, guarded by groups of demons, filled with innumerable
troops and decorated with banners and flags.

Seeing Lanka besieged, Ravana the Lord of Demons spoke as follows to Prahasta who
was skilled in war-fare and who wished well of him even at a critical time.

"O, Prahasta the proficient in war-free! I do not see any other deliverance than a
battle for this city, which is besieged suddenly and being devastated."

"Either myself or Kumbhakarna or yourself my army-chief or Indrajit or Nikumbha and
none else could undertake such a task!"

"For that reason, taking a company of warriors, you quickly place yourself in their
midst and set forth in order to triumph over all those monkeys."

"Unsettled in no time on knowing your decision to enter the battle-field, the army
of monkeys will run away on hearing the raring sound of the leaders of demons."

"The monkeys are unsteady, mis-behaved and fickle-minded. They do not tolerate your
sound, as elephants the lion's roar."

"O, Prahasta! As that army takes to its heels, Rama along with Lakshmana being
supportless, will fall into your power though unwillingly."

"A skeptical misfortune is preferable to one that is certain! Whether it is
unpleasing to hear or not, say what you consider as an advantage to us."

Hearing the words of Ravana, Prahasta the Army-General spoke the following words to
Ravana, like Ushana the preceptor of demons would speak to Bali, the king of demons.

O, king! Formerly, we deliberated this matter with our wise ministers and, after
having a good dialogue with each other, a disagreement arose between us."

"To return Seetha was what I considered preferable. Not to do so meant war; we
foresaw this."

"I have ever been honoured by you at appropriate times by gifts, felicitations and
nice words. When the opportunity arises, is it not for me to render you a service?"

"Neither wives nor sons nor riches are going to be spared by me. See you me,
intending to sacrifice my life for your sake in the battle."

Having spoken thus to Lord Ravana, the General Prahasta said to his leading officers
who stood before him as follows:

"Gather a large army of demons together for me. Today, the flesh-eating birds and
beasts shall feed on the enemy that I strike down on the battle-field with my swift arrows."

Hearing that command of Prahasta, the mighty leaders of the army assembled the
forces in the abode of that demon.

Within a short while, that City of Lanka was filled with those terrific
demon-warriors, resembling elephants and wielding various types of weaponry.

While some demons propitiated the fire-god with their offerings and paid homage to
Brahmanas, a fragrant freeze bearing the scent of clarified butter, began to blow.

Then, the demons who were ready for the battle, delightedly wore garlands of
different shapes, consecrated by certain Mantras (sacred formulas).

Thereafter, armed with bows and armours, the demons with their eyes turned towards
their king Ravana, marched at a brisk pace and ranged themselves round Prahasta.

Then, Prahasta who got ready with his weapons and armour, after bidding obeisance to
the king and striking a terrible kettle-drum, mounted his chariot, which was kept ready, yoked to
an extremely swift horses, well controlled by a charioteer, emanating a noise resembling that of a
large cloud, actually shining like moon-light, inviolable with a flag bearing an ensign of snake,
with a good collision-guard, with nice wheels and decorated with a net of pure gold smiling as it
were in its magnificence.

Then, Prahasta the one who was commanded by Ravana, ascended his chariot and set out
from Lanka soon along with a huge army.

While Prahasta the general sallied forth, the sound of a kettle-drum, the resonance
of musical instruments and the sound of conches were heard, as though filling the earth like the
roar of a cloud.

The demons with terrific forms and bulky bodies, shouting with dreadful voices, went
in front, as forerunners of Prahasta.

Narantaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada and Samunnata, attendants of Prahasta sallied forth,
surrounding him on all sides.

He emerged from the eastern gate in the midst of an immense, formidable and orderly
arranged army, resembling a herd of elephants.

In the centre of that army, vast as the sea, that Prahasta in his fury, came forth
appearing like Death at the end of the world.

The uproar that arose on his setting forth with his demons raising the war-cries
drew sinister answering calls from all creatures in Lanka.

In a cloudless sky, birds of prey eating flesh and blood, flew in circles from left
to right towards the chariot.

Fearful jackals vomited forth fire and flames, howling repeatedly. A meteor fell
from the sky and the wind blew harshly.

The plants, in opposition to each other, lost their brilliance. The clouds, with
their raucous sound, showered blood on Prahasta's chariot and dampened those who were walking in
front of it.

A vulture facing the south alighted on the top of the standard, croaking towards
both of its sides and deprived the demon of his entire lustre.

The goad fell several times then from the hand of the charioteer, himself a Suta
(the son of a Kshatriya by a Brahamana woman) eventhough skilled in controlling the horses, as he
entered the battle-field.

That rarely splendour which clothed Prahasta at the time of his exit vanished in an
instant and horses stumbled on the even ground.

Beholding that Prahasta, renowned for his excellences and martial valour; as he
advanced to give battle, the army of monkeys went forward to attack him.

Thereafter, an exceedingly tumultuous clamour arose among the monkeys as they tore
up the trees and seized hold of huge rocks.

Both the armies of the yelling demons and the roaring monkeys were delighted,
impetuous and powerful with impatience to slay each other and challenging each other with great
shouts.

Thereafter, the evil-minded Prahasta sallied forth for victory towards the army of
Sugreeva, whom in his folly, imagined he would destroy, with an accelerated speed as a grass-hopper
rushes towards a flame.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Ravana for his part heard the mournful and plaintive cry of the afflicted
female-demons in every house at Lanka.

Sighing for a long time and remaining engrossed in reflection for a while, that
Ravana was very much enraged and assumed a frightful appearance.

Nipping his lips with his teeth, his eyes becoming blood-red with anger, and his
sight becoming difficult to endure even for the demons, Ravana looked like the augmented fire of
dissolution.

Ravana, in words indistinct with anger as though consuming them with his glance,
ordered the demons, standing there near him, viz. Mahodara, Mahaparshva and Virupaksha, the demon
(as follows): "Tell the armies asking them to start immediately, as per my command."

Hearing that command of Ravana, those demons were tormented with fear and enjoined
those armies of demons, who felt unagitated, in accordance with the orders of the king.

Saying, 'so it be', all those demons of terrible aspect, praying for the blessing of
the Almighty for averting evil, sallied forth, with their faces turned towards the
battle-field.

Paying reverence to Ravana according to the rules of propriety, all those great
car-warriors stood with joined palms, wishing victory to their lord.

Laughing heartily, Ravana then, stupefied as he was with anger, spoke to those
demons viz. Mahodara, Mahaparshva and Virupaksha, the demons as follows:

"Today, I will send Rama and Lakshmana to the abode of Death, with my arrows looking
similar to the sun at the time of dissolution of the Universe."

"By killing the enemies now, I will take vengeance for Khara, Kumbhakarna, Prahasta
and Indrajit."

"The sky overcast by my arrows, like clouds, will not be distinctly seen. Neither
the quarters, nor the heaven, nor the seas will come to view."

"With a multitude of plumed arrows joined with my bow, I will kill, by turns, the
troops of monkey-chiefs today."

"By mounting on a chariot, having a speed equal to that of wind, I will destroy
today the armies of monkeys, with waves of arrows arising out of the ocean of my bow.

"Like an elephant, today I will destroy ponds in the form of troops of monkeys
shining like the filaments of lotus, with their faces resembling full-blown lotuses."

"With their faces transfixed with arrows, the monkey-leaders, lying on the
battle-field today will adorn the earth as with lotuses together with the stalks."

"With each arrow released in battle today, I shall tear one hundred full of monkeys,
the most furious of their troop, fighting with trees."

"By killing the enemy today, I shall wipe off the tears of those demons, who lost
their brothers and sons."

"With the monkeys pierced with my arrows, lying scattered in the battle-field and
bereft of their lives today, I shall cover the earth so fully, that it would be possible to see its
surface only with effort."

"Today, I shall satiate the crows, vultures and all those other creatures which eat
the flesh, with the flesh of enemies, struck by my arrows."

"Arrange my chariot quickly. Bring my bow swiftly. Let all the remaining demons
here, follow me to the combat."

Hearing that command of Ravana, Mahaparshva ordered the army-chiefs, standing there,
as follows: "let the army be made ready quickly."

Going around the city of Lanka, the army-chiefs for their part, with quick
resolution, joined hand in hand and hastened the demons in every house to set out for the
battle.

The demons, of terrible aspect and having awful faces, then roaring, with their arms
equipped with various weapons viz. swords, sharp-edged darts, pikes, maces, clubs, plough-like
weapons, sharp-edged javelins, huge Kutas and Mudgara, staffs, discuses of every kind, sharpened
axes, slings for throwing stones, stones or cylindrical wooden pieces with iron pikes and other
excellent weapons, rushed out within a moment.

Then, as per the orders of Ravana, the army-commander hurriedly brought a chariot,
moving swiftly, along with a charioteer and yoked with eight horses. Thereupon, the awful Ravana
mounted that chariot, shining with his own splendour.

Then, surrounded by several demons, Ravana sallied forth quickly, as though he was
cracking the earth with a profundity of his strength.

Thereupon, a great noise emanated on all sides from tabors, drums, Kettle-drums and
counches along with the clamour of the demons.

A clamour was heard, saying "There comes the ruler of demons, the abductor of
Seetha, the destroyer of Brahmanas, the enemy of gods, notorious for his bad conduct, accompanied
by his canopy and pair of whisks, to fight with Rama, the foremost among the Raghu dynasty."

By that huge sound, the earth trembled. Hearing that sound suddenly, the monkeys ran
away in fear.

The long-armed Ravana, for his part, with extra-ordinary energy, surrounded by his
ministers, turned up for victory in quest of victory.

Mahaparshva and Mahodara as also Virupaksha, who was difficult to overpower, as
order by Ravana, then ascended their chariots.

Those demons, roaring elatedly, as though cracking the earth, and emitting an awfull
uproar, sallied forth, longing for victory.

Then, the powerful Ravana, resembling the all-destroying Time in the form of Yama,
along with his army-troops of demons, set out for the battle with his raised bow.

Then, that Ravana, the great chariot-warrior, ascending his chariot driven by swift
horses, sallied forth to the gate, where Rama and Lakshmana were.

Then, the sun lost its radiance. The quarters too were enveloped in darkness. The
birds emitted fearful notes. The earth too trembled violently.

The cloud rained blood. The horses stumbled. A vulture descended on the top of the
ensign. Jackals emitted sinister howls.

His left eye too throbbed. His left arm trembled. He became pale-faced. His voice
was a little lowered.

When Ravana the demon was sallying forth for the battle, the following evil
phenomena, predicting his death, appeared in the battle-field.

A meteor with a sound similar to a thunder, fell down from the sky. Ill-omened
vultures together with crows cried out aloud.

Ignoring these dreadful bad omens due to his ignorance, Ravana marched forward for
the purpose of the massacre in battle, driven as he was by fate.

On hearing the sound of the chariot of those mighty demons, that army of monkeys too
returned for the fight.

A tumultuous battle ensued between those monkeys and demons, who were fond of
victory and summoning each other for combat with rage.

Thereupon, the enraged Ravana, with his arrows decked with that army of monkeys.

Some monkeys had their heads chopped off by Ravana. Some had their hearts pierced.
Some were made deprived of their ears.

Some were struck down breathless. Some were torn in their ribs. Some had their
skulls smashed. Some were deprived of their eyes.

Whichever side Ravana was coming in his chariot on the battle-field, his eyes
rolling in anger, those monkey-warriors, on that side, could not with stand the rapidity of his
arrows.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing Prahasta setting out with a martial ardour, Rama the conqueror of enemies,
smiling, spoke to Vibhishana as follows:

"Who is he with a very huge body, coming with a great speed along with a large army?
O, the mighty armed! Tell me about this strong demon."

Hearing Rama's words, Vibhishana replied as follows "He is guarded by two-thirds of
the army of Lanka. He is a demon of prowess, skilled in the use of mystic weapons and valiant. He
is the demon named Prahasta, the Army general of Ravana."

That huge and powerful army of monkeys, who began to emit cries of defiance with
fury, thereupon saw the terrible Prahasta of formidable exploits coming forth towards them.

Swords, lances, daggers, darts, spears, clubs, maces bars, barbed missiles, various
kinds of axes and different bows glittered in the hands of demons, who were running up towards the
monkeys and seeking victory.

The monkeys who were burning to fight took hold of trees in flower, rocks and lofty
and thick stones.

As they approached each other, a very great battle arose between those combatants
who showered down a hail of arrows and a bombardment of stones.

In that battle, many of the demons killed several excellent monkeys and several
monkeys killed many of the demons.

Some monkeys were smashed by spears and some others by finer weapons. Some were
struck by iron bars and some others were slit by axes.

Yet again, some fell breathlessly on the ground and some were destroyed by the
arrows aimed at them with their hearts splits asunder.

Cut into two with the strokes of swords by those powerful demons, some monkeys,
trembling, fell on the earth, their sides torn open.

Even the flock of demons on all sides were crushed on to the earth by the furious
monkeys with tree and mountain-peaks.

Having been administered thundering slaps with their hands and terrific blows with
their fists, the faces and eyes of demons were were lacerated. The demons vomited plenty of blood
from their months.

A tumultuous clamour arose among monkeys and demons, as cries of pain and leonine
roars were bellowed.

The monkeys and the demons with anger, following the path of heroes, with their
cruel and hostile eyes, accomplished their deeds with great courage.

Narantaka Kumbhahanu, Mahanada and Samunnata all these companions of Prahasta killed
the monkeys.

Dvivida, with a mountain-peak, struck down Narantaka, the one among them who was
rushing upon quickly and killing the monkeys.

The ape Durmukha on his part, with a ready hand, uprooted a very large tree and
crushed the demon Samunnata.

The energetic Jambavan with a great fury seized a huge rock and threw it on the
chest-region of Mahanada.

Then, the valiant Kumbhahanu there in the battle, having attacked the General Tara,
who was armed with a huge tree, received a blow immediately cost him his life.

Not tolerating the aforesaid act, Prahasta having occupied his chariot with bow in
hand, caused a terrible havoc among the monkeys.

Then, with the rapid movement of both the armies, there arose of clamour resembling
the roar of an unfathomable and tempestuous ocean in a time of dissolution.

The demon Prahasta, who was hard to be subdued in battle, with full of anger,
tormented the monkeys by an immense avalanche of arrows in that great combat.

By the frightening corpses of monkeys and demons, appearing like hideous mountains,
a very extensive area of the ground is covered.

That ground, covered by the stream of blood, shone as in the month of spring when
overspread fully with the bloossoming crimson-coloured Palasa flowers.

With the heaps of warriors for its banks the broken weapons its trees, the torrents
of blood its huge waves, death appeared like an ocean receiving its floods, livers and spleens its
mire, entrails its moss, severed heads and trunks the fish, and morsels of flesh the grass, the
innumerable vultures its lovely swans, herons its geese, covered as it was with fat for the foam,
the tumult the sound of its waters, the battle field resembled a river, incapable of being crossed
by cowards, visited by water-fowls at the end of the rainy season, those demons and the foremost of
the monkeys crossed over that impassable river, as elephants lead their herds across a lake that
the lotuses have covered with pollen.

Then, Nila saw Prahasta who was employing a multitude of arrows sitting in the
chariot and annihilating the monkeys swiftly.

Seeing Nila who was running towards him in the battle-field, as a rocking wind in
the sky rushes towards a large massive clouds, Prahasta the Army general attacked Nila himself with
his chariot having the sun's colour.

That Prahasta the Army General, who was excellent among the wielders of bow, drew
the bow-string and hurled the arrows towards Nila in that great battle.

Those arrows with a great speed resembling furious snakes employed by Prahasta
proceeded towards Nila, pierced him and fell on the ground.

That great ape of prowess Nila, who was struck by sharp arrows resembling flames,
uprooted a tree and thumped it on the descending Prahasta who was most difficult to be
assaulted.

Being unable to restrain the series of arrows hurled at him by that evil-minded
demon, nila received them with closed eyes.

Like a bull standing under a sudden autumnal down-pour, so under that intolerable
and sudden rain of darts released by Prahasta, Nila endured with closed eyes though it was scarce
to be endured.

The exceedingly strong and the great Nila, enraged over the volley of darts, killed
Prahasta's horses by hurling a huge Sala tree on them.

Thereafter the greatly enraged Nila quickly broke the bow of Prahasta the
evil-minded demon and shouted again and again.

Deprived of his bow, Prahasta the leader of the army, seizing a formidable mace,
leapt down from the chariot.

Those two army-chiefs, who were courageous and in whom enmity had sprung up, with
their limbs covered with blood, wee standing like two elephants in rut.

Lion and tiger in gait, lion and tiger in gestures, those two warriors tore each
other with their shap teeth. Vanquishers of other heroes and intrepid combatants, both of them,
thirsting for fame, resembled Vritra and Indra.

Then, that Prahasta exerting himself well struck Nila on his forehead with a mace
and blood oozed from his forehead.

Whereupon, that great ape, his limbs smeared with blood, seized a huge tree and
struck Prahasta full in his chest with fury.

Ignoring that blow, he seized a huge mace and ran in strength towards Nila the
strong monkey.

Seeing Prahasta of terrible velocity briskly rushing towards him, Nila the great
monkey took a huge rock swiftly.

Nila quickly hurled that rock on the head of Prahasta who was longing for war and
fighting with a mace in the battle.

Then, that huge and terrific rock hurled by Nila the leader of the monkeys broke
Prahasa's head into myriad pieces.

That Prahasta who lost his breath, was disfigured and dead, bereft of his senses and
at once fell on the ground like a tree cut up by the root.

A lot of blood oozed from his broken head. From his body two, blood streamed forth
like a cascade from a mountain.

Thier leader having been slain by Nila that unshakable and large army of demons,
becoming disconsolated, withdrew to Lanka.

Thier chief of Army having been killed, those demons could not continue to stand
firmy there, any more than water on reaching a breached bridge.

That Prahasta the chief of Army having been slain, those demons dumb dispirited and
inactive, regained the abode of their king. They became unconscious as it were plunged in an ocean
of burning grief.

The triumphant Nila, however, was honoured by Rama and Lakshmana for his task well
accomplished and experienced supreme joy.
undefined
undefined
undefined

On hearing Makaraksha having been killed, Ravana who had been ever victorious in
battle, grinding his teeth in rage, reflected on what to do then and there, and as greatly furious
as he was, instructed Indrajit, his son to proceed to the battle-field.

"O hero! Either remaining yourself invisible or visible, kill Rama and Lakshmana,
the brothers of great prowess. You are superior in strength by all means."

"You have conquered Indra, of incomparable deeds, in battle. Can you not kill those
two men, on seeing them in the battle-field?"

Hearing the words of Ravana, that Indrajit, bowing to the command of his father,
poured oblations into the sacred fire, with due ceremony, on the sacrificial ground.

Even as he was pouring oblations into the sacred fire there, the female-demons
carrying red turbans (for the use of priests) hastily arrived at the spot where Indrajit was
there.

Weapons (such as a lance) served as blades of Shara grass (for being spread around
the sacrificial fire). Chips of wood of Vibhitaka tree served as wooden sticks to feed the
sacrificial fire as also red robes and iron ladles were used for cleaning and pouring clarified
melted butter into the sacrificial fire.

Having spread on the ground around all the sides of the sacrificial fire with other
weapons along with lances, the demon seized hold of the neck of a live goat, entirely black and
consigned it to the fire.

Such omens as betokened victory appeared in the smokeless fire which burst into
mighty flames, when it was fully aroused by that single offering.

Becoming visible in person, the god of fire, who was shooting out flames towards the
right and who shone brightly like refined gold, received that offering.

Offering oblations in fire and gratifying the gods, the devils and demons, Indrajit
ascended an excellent and splendid chariot, capable of disappearing from sight.

Drawn by four horses, provided with sharp arrows and a mighty bow placed on it, that
excellent chariot looked beautiful.

Adorned with gold, that chariot glittered on account of its body and was decorated
with carved images of antelopes, full moons and crescents.

The flag-post of Indrajit shone like a flaming fire, provided, as it was, with large
rings of gold and decorated with cat's eye gems.

Protected by the missile presided over by Brahma, which was as efflugent as the sun,
that Indrajit endowed with exceptional strength, became difficult to be attacked.

Coming forth from the city and having acquired the capacity of vanishing from the
sight, by offering oblations into the sacred fire, with the uttereance of spells sacred to demons,
that indrajit, who was ever victorious in war, spoke as follows:

"By killing both the princes who left home to become religious mendicants in the
forest in vain, I will present a gift of victory secured in the battle, to my father, Ravana
today."

"By making the earth bereft of monkeys today and by killing Rama and Lakshmana, I
will create a great spleasure". Thus speaking, Indrajit vanished from thes sight.

Impelled, as he was, by Ravana, the fiery Indrajit, with his barbarons bow and steel
arrows, swiftly came to the battle-field enraged.

That Indrajit saw the two heroes, showering a multitude of arrows. Both the princes,
having mighty prowess, looked like three- hooded serpents in the middle of the monkeys.

Concluding that both of them were the two princes, Rama and Lakshmana and stringing
his bow, he covered them with a flood of arrows, as the rainy clouds do.

That Indrajit with his chariot, reaching the sky and remaining invisible, struck
Rama and Lakshmana with his sharp arrows.

When enveloped by a stream of arrows Rama and Lakshamana, fitted arrows to their
bows and revealed divine missiles.

Though covering the sky with a net-work of arrows, the two mighty princes could not
touch Indrajit with their arrows charged with mystic missiles and which were efflugent like the
sun.

Covering the sky, the illustrious Indrajit created a dark-like smoke. He made the
quarters also invisible, by enclosing them with mist-liek darkness.

While Indrajit was moving about, neither the sound produced by the impact of his
palm on the bow string was heard, nor the sound of his wheels or the clattering of hoofs of his
horses could be heard, nor did his form come tot he view.

In that thick darkness, that long-armed Indrajit showered hails of his steel arrows,
like wonderful shower of rocks.

That enraged Indrajit in battle, abundantly pierced Rama in all his limbs with his
arrows, which were earlier granted as boons to him and which were effluent like the sun.

Both Rama and Lakshmana, the foremost of men, who were being struck with steel
arrows, like two mountains being hit by torrents, released sharp golden-shafted arrows.

Those arrows, adorned with plumes of heron, reaching Indrajit in the sky and
piercing him, fell to the ground, soaked in blood.

Shining beyond measure with a flood of arrows, the two excellent men began to chop
off those arrows which were falling on them with many arrows called by the name of Bhallas.

Both Rama and Lakshmana for their part directed their excellent missiles in the
direction from which they saw the aforesaid sharp arrows, fallen.

Indrajit for his part, who was a superior chariot-warrior and who was swift in
discharging missiles, rushed on towards all sides and pierced Rama and Lakshmana with his sharp
arrows.

Those valiant princes, Rama and Lakshmana pierced deeply with well-made goldne
shafted arrows, appeared like two Kamshuka trees in flowering.

No one could perceive his rapid movement, like the position of the sun when the sky
is thickly overcast with clouds, nor his form nor his bows and arrows, nor any other thing about
him whatsoever could be known.

Struck down by him, the monkeys were killed. The monkeys dropped dead in hundreds on
the earth's surface there.

Then, Lakshmana for his part was enraged and told his brother that he would employ
the missile presided over by Brahma for the purpose of killing all the demons.

Then, Rama spoke to that Lakshmana, who was endowed with auspicious bodily marks as
follows: "You ought not to kill all the demons on earth, merely for the sake of a single
demon."

"You ought not to kill on this earth one who is not fighting or one who is hiding or
one who seeks refuge with joined palms or is fleeing or is intoxicated."

"O long-armed Lakshmana! We shall try to kill Indrajit alone. We will employ mystic
mssiles with great impetuosity and which are equal to venomous serpents."

"On seeing this demons, the leaders of mokey-troops will forcibly kill this petty
demon, who is skilled in conjuring tricks and whose chariot remains invisible."

"Scorched by my mystic missiles, he will fall dead on the ground, even if he enters
the earth or into heaven or into the subterrranean world or penetrates the vault of heaven and
remains completely hidden in this manner."

Speaking highly meaningful words in the aforesaid manner, the great-souled Rama,
surrounded by the foremost of monkeys, started to reflect on the speedy means of killing the
furious Indrajit, the demons of cruel deeds.
undefined
undefined
undefined

That army of valiant monkeys along with the king Sugriva looked charming like a full
moon night in autumn presided over by the moon and illuminated by bright stars.

The earth pressed under foot by that multitude of army which was energetic like a
sea, was trembled with fear by the rapid movement of that army.

Then the monkeys heard a great tumult arising in Lanka and noisy sounds of
kettledrums and tabours, which caused their hair to stand on end.

The leaders of monkeys were rejoiced by that sound. But by not tolerating that
sound, they emitted shouts, which surpassed that uproar.

Those demons too heard the roaring of the wildly delighted monkeys, which roar
sounded like thundering of clouds in the sky.

Seeing Lanka dressed with multi colored flags and buntings, Rama bethought himself
of Sita and his heart was filled with grief.

"Sita whose eyes resemble those of a young deer, was detained by Ravana there, as
Rohini star is overshadowed by the red bodied planet (mars)."

Seeing Lakshmana after a warm and deep sigh, the heroic Rama spoke the following
words, which were beneficial for him at that time :-

"O, Lakshmana! Look at this Lanka, which appears as though constructed on a hilltop
by Visvakarma with his imagination and so elevated scraping the sky."

The city of Lanka was constructed densely with many seven storied buildings and
appears like a sky the abode of Vishnu (the all pervaded), covered with white clouds."

"Lanka is made beautiful by the garden vying with chaitraratha (the garden of Kubera
the god of riches) with songs of birds of various species, with fruit bearing flowers and charms in
bloom.

"See how a gentle breeze sways the branches where the cuckoos abound where bees
swarm and where the birds are excited with joy."

Rama the son of Dasaratha spoke as aforesaid to Lakshmana. The army there was
divided into battalions according to the procedure found in scriptures.

He issued the following commands: --"Taking these troops of monkeys from the army,
let the valiant and the invincible Angada take up his position with Nila at the center of the
formation.

Let Rishabha along with the multitude of monkeys take up his position, having
recourse to the right side of the army."

"Let Gandhamadana, the strong and unconquerable, resembling an elephant in rut, take
his position superintending the left side of the monkey troops."

"I shall stand alert in the forefront of the army along with Lakshmana. Let
Jambavan, Sushena and Vegadarshi the monkey - those three exceeding wise leaders of bears and
monkeys- protest the belly portion of the army."

"Let Sugriva the king of monkeys protect the rear guard of the army, resembling
Varuna (the god of water) who remains enveloped with splendor protects the western quarter of the
earth."

That army with innumerable divisions, being skillfully distributed led by the
foremost of monkeys, resembled heavens with their mass of clouds.

With a desire to crush the demons in battle, the monkeys, seizing peaks of mountains
and gigantic trees, reached Lanka.

All the heroic monkeys held the following resolve in their minds, "It is with peak
of mountains or with our bare fists even, we shall shatter this Lanka into pieces."

Then, Rama with great splendor spoke the following words to Sugriva, "Our forces are
properly marshaled. Let this Shuka be released."

Hearing the words of Rama, Sugriva the lord of monkeys released Shuka the messenger,
as per the order of Rama.

Shuka who was harassed by the monkeys and released then as per the words of Rama,
was trembling with great fear and reached Ravana.

Ravana, even while laughing, enquired Shuka with the following words: " why were
your wings tied up? You appear with your wings plucked up. Have you not fallen as a victim to their
various fickle minds?"

Asked as aforesaid by the king Ravana, Shuka agitated as he was with fear, gave him
the following excellent reply: "On the northern shore of the ocean, I conveyed your message in a
smooth tone, conciliating and without any ambiguity exactly as per your instructions."

"Just on seeing me, the enraged monkeys jumped on me and seized me. They soon
started beating and plucking me with their fists."

"O, Lord of demons! Those monkeys are not capable of being spoken to, or possible of
being questioned in this matter. Monkeys, by their very nature, are angry and ferocious."

"That Rama the killer of Viraadha, Kabandha and Khara came along with Sugriva to the
place of Sita."

"Having constructed a bridge across the sea and crossed the salty ocean and
expelling the demons, here stands Rama wielding a bow."

"Thousands of divisions of hordes of bears and monkeys resembling mountains and
clouds, cover the earth."

"There is no more possibility of an alliance between these two armies - the army of
demons and the army of monkeys- than between a God and a demon."

"Very soon they will come to our rampart. Immediately, do any one of these two acts-
either to restore Sita or to offer a combat to him."

Hearing the words of Shuka, Ravana with his eyes becoming blood red in anger, as if
he would consume him with his glance, said as follows:

"Even if I were frightened by all the worlds or even if I were to face a battle with
celestials or Gandharvas (celestial singers) or demons, I would not give back Sita."

"When will my arrows soon fall upon Rama, as large black bees excited with joy fall
upon a tree in bloom at spring time?"

"When shall I consume his body flowing with blood, by the blazing arrows released
from my bow, as flaming torches destroy an elephant?"

"Endowed with a huge army I shall eclipse the aforesaid army of Rama, as the
brilliance of all stars is obscured at the rising of the sun."

"My rashness is like that of the sea and my strength is like that of the wind. Rama
is not aware of it. That is why, he is desirous of meeting me in a combat."

"Rama has not seen my arrows resembling venomous serpents lying in my quiver. That
is why, he desires to fight with me."

Rama was not formerly aware of my prowess in battle. I shall cause to resound Vina
(a musical instrument) in the form of my bow, which is played on with the heads of my arrows, the
bow string producing a tumultuous sound, the huge cries of the wounded its terrible accompaniment,
the darts sounding its innumerable notes, when I enter a vast stage in the form of my enemy ranks
in that battle."

"Neither by the thousand eyed Indra the god of celestials nor by Varuna the God of
waters in person in a combat, nor by Yama the god of death with the fire of his arrows, nor by
Kubera the lord of riches in person, can I be able to be attacked in a great battle."
undefined
undefined
undefined

On hearing that great tumult of battle between demons and monkeys, Rama spoke to
Jambavan as follows:

"O excellent Jambavan! From the way in which a very great terrible rattling sound of
arms in heard, it seems an exceedingly difficult feat has been performed by Hanuma. It is
certain."

"O lord of bears! Therefore, accompanied by your own army, go and quickly extend
your help to that Hanuma, who is fighting."

Saying "Yes, so be it" and surrounded by his own army, Jambavan came to the western
gate, where the monkey, Hanuma was.

Thereupon, Jambavan saw Hanuma, coming with monkeys, who had given fight and were
sighing (on account of grief caused by the destruction of Seetha).

Seeing that terrible army of bears, looking like a dark cloud on their way, ready
(to perform battle) and effectively intercepting it, Hanuma retreated them all.

Quickly seeking the presence of Rama with that army, the highly illustrious Hanuma,
with sorrow, spoke the following words to Rama:

"While we, who were carrying on the battle, stood looking on, Indrajit, the son of
Ravana killed Seetha in front of us, even though she continued to weep."

"O destroyer of enemies! On seeing her with my distressed mind, I felt sad. I came
to report the event to you."

Hearing those words of Hanuma, Rama then was agitated with grief and fell down on
the ground, like a tree with its bottom chopped off.

On seeing that Rama, who with the semblance of god, falling on the ground, the
chiefs of monkeys came bouncing from all sides and rushed towards him.

They sprinkled him with water, fragrant with scent of lotuses and lilies, as one
would sprinkle an inextinguishable as one would sprinkle an inextinguishable fire, which has just
flared up suddenly and is burning all.

Then, the highly lamenting Lakshmana, having embraced that ailing Rama in his arms,
spoke the following meaningful words, endowed with reason:

"O venerable brother! Virtue cannot save you, who are sticking to the noble path and
who have subdued the senses, from adversities and is (hence) useless."

"Just as inanimate and animate beings are visible, likewise virtue and vice are not
visible. Therefore, my opinion is that virtue is non-existent."

"Even as inanimate beings and animate beings are expressly visible, likewise this
form of virtue of vice is not established. For, in that case, a virtuous man like you would not
have this misfortune."

"If unrighteousness had been effective, Ravana should have obtained the hell. You,
endowed with virtue, would never obtain such troubles."

"Since there is absence of calamity for Ravana and misfortune occurred to you, the
result of vice is obtained through virtue and the result of virtue is obtained through vice. The
contraries of each other have changed the roles with each other."

Will the fruit of virtue be obtained through virtue and fruit of vice through vice?
If that in whom unrighteousness is rooted are enjoined with the fruit of unrighteousness alone,
people showing interest in unrighteousness would be deprived of the fruit of virtue. The fruit of
virtue alone would have accrued to those who administer righteousness through that virtue?

Since prosperities of those, in whom unrighteousness is rooted, develop; while those
who have a conduct of virtue suffer, hence these two (virtue and vice) are useless.

"O Rama! If sinful doers are killed by their own vice, that unrighteousness, as it
does, in the act of killing, will be forthwith destroyed. Whom will that unrighteousness destroy
(which is destroyed in the course of three seconds)?"

"Or if a man is killed by a recourse to a ritual prescribed in the scriptures or
kills another (by recourse to such a ritual), that destiny alone, which is engendered by that
ritual, is tainted by that sinful act and not the agent."

"O Rama, the destroyer of adversaries! It is not clear how prosperity can be reached
by righteousness, which has never known how to retaliate. Hence, righteousness seems to be
non-existent."

"O chief among the virtuous! If righteousness were really there, no evil whatever
would have accrued to you. As you reaped such a calamity, the hypotheses that the destiny
engendered by virtuous acts is real is not proved."*

"Or else, if righteousness becomes weak and cowardly, as it surrenders to the might,
it is my opinion that the righteousness, which lacks strength and has been deprived of its
capacity, should no longer be pursued."

"Depend on might, as you do now on virtue, if the virtue is subordinate to might,
thus giving up predominance of virtue."

"O tormentator of enemies! Or else, if speaking truth were indeed a virtue, our
lying father, who was merciless to you, was disunited from you. Were you not bound by that
announcement made by our father regarding your installation as the Prince Regent?"

"O tormentator of your enemies! Had either righteousness or unrighteousness worth
pursuing, Indra the wielder of thunderbolt would not have performed a sacrifice on killing a sage
(viz. Viswarupa, son of Twasta*)

"O Rama! Virtue destroys enemies, when united with might (something other than
virtue). O Rama! A man does all this, according to his will."

"O Rama in a pitiable condition. My opinion is that righteousness consists in such
recourse to both virtue and strength. The very roots of virtue (in the form of earthly gain) have
been chopped off by you in that you spurned the sovereignty the other day."

"By the treasures brought from place to place and augmented by means of various
strategies, all the tasks are indeed fulfilled, as the rivers flow from the mountains."

"All the tasks of a man of small intellect, bereft of his wealth, get a cessation as
small rivers dry up in summer-season."

"Such a man, brought up by comforts, renouncing wealth (within easy reach) and
seeking comfort, proceeds to commit sinful act and then evil (in the form of punishment) follows
from it."

"Friends gather round him, who has riches. Relatives stand by him, who has riches.
He alone is virile in the world, who has riches. He alone is a learned man, who has riches."

"He alone is a mighty man, who has riches. He alone is a prudent man, who has
riches. He alone is highly fortunate. He alone is distinguished, who has riches."

"O resolute one! I told you about these evils attendant on the abjuration of wealth.
The ground on which you made the resolve to sacrifice the kingdom was not known to me."

"A man in whom the treasures abide, religious merit and wealth are obtained. All
would be favourable to him. To the penniless man, who has a desire for wealth and even hunting for
wealth, it is not possible to attain wealth."

"O king! Delight, sensuous pleasure, pride, virtue, anger, peace, control of the
senses all these are attained from wealth."

"Those riches, due to renunciation of which, worldly happiness of those practicing
the path of virtue gets lost, are not seen in you, any more than the planets are seen in cloudy
days."

"O valiant one! While you were in exile, faithful to the command of your father,
your wife who was more beloved than life itself, was stolen away by a demon."

"O valiant prince! I shall dispel with my exploits today, that great agony caused by
Indrajit. Therefore, rise O Rama!"

"O the foremost among men! O the long-armed one! O the firmly resolute one! Arise!
Why are you not knowing about yourself, who is the great-souled and whose spirit is
disciplined?"

"O faultless one! On seeing the death of Seetha and enraged, rising to do favour for
you, I shall completely destroy with my arrows, Lanka with its chariots, elephants and horses along
with Ravana."
undefined
undefined
undefined

While highly wise monkey-troops and the demons were fighting a terrible military
ferocity arose in them.

Those demons, the best of ogres, doing terrific acts and eager to triumph in
Ravana's name, marched ahead on steeds with golden trappings or elephants resembling pointed
flames, or in chariots flashing like the sun and themselves wearing beautiful armours, creating
reverberant sounds in the ten regions.

The great army of monkeys, also eager to triumph, marched opposite to those troops
of demons of terrible acts.

Extra-ordinary duels arose between those demons and monkeys, who ran up towards each
other.

The demon Indrajit of immense energy fought with Angada the son of Vali, as the
demon Andhaka fought with Shiva the Lord of destruction.

The ever indomitable Sampati fought with Prajangha and Hanuman the monkey measured
his strength with Jambumali.

The demon with great fury, Vibhishana the younger brother of Ravana confronted with
Shatrughna possessing fiery velocity in battle.

Gaja of great strength fought with a demon called Tapana and Nila too of great
energy fought with Nikumbha.

Sugreeva the king of monkeys confronted well with Praghasa and the glorious
Lakshmana confronted with Virupaksha in the battle.

The invincible Agniketu, Rashmiketu, Mitraghnu and Yajnakopa confronted with
Rama.

Vajramushti confronted with Mainda and Ashaniprabha with Dvivida. Those principal
monkeys Mainda and Dvivida confronted with those highly terrific demons.

Pratapana, the valiant, terrific and invincible in battle fought well with Nala of
intense speed in battle.

That great monkey called Sushena, the strong son of Yama fought with Vidyunmali.

Some other dreadful monkeys, having finished their fight with many demons, swiftly
got a duel with some other demons.

A very great tumultuous battle, which caused hair to stand on end, continued there
between heroic demons and monkeys, who were eager to triumph.

Streams of blood flowed from the bodies of monkeys and demons, with turfs of hair
and carrying bodies in the stream, like timber.

The enraged Indrajit struck the valiant Angada (who can tear asunder the enemy
forces) with a mace, like Indra the Lord of celestials with his thunder-bolt.

The swift monkey, Angada struck his chariot, having a variegated body of gold, along
with horses and the charioteer in the battle.

Sampati, who was struck by Prajangha with three arrows, killed Prajangha by an
Ashvakarna tree, at the zenith of the combat.

Jambumali, standing in his chariot, full of strength and fury banged on Hanuman's
breast, with a javelin kept in his chariot, on the field of battle.

Hanuman, the son of the wind-god, ascended his chariot and soon overthrew it
together with the demon, with the palm of his hand.

That terrific Pratapana, while roaring, ran towards Nala. Nala suddenly scratched
out Pratapana's eyes.

Pierced in the limbs by sharp arrows by Praghasa the swift-handed demon, Sugreeva
the Lord of demons immediately killed Praghasa (who was appearing to swallow the monkey-troops)
with a Saptaparna tree.

Lakshmana with a terrific look, having tormented Virupaksha the demon with a shower
of arrows, finally killed him with an arrow.

The invincible Agniketu, Rashmiketu, Mitrughna and Yajnakopa wounded Rama by
arrows.

The enraged Rama on his part chopped the hands of those four demons in the battle by
his four terrific arrows having fire-like points.

Struck with a fist by Mainda in the battle, Vajramushti along with his chariot fell
to the ground like a watch-tower on a city-wall.

Nikumbha chopped Nila, having a radiance of a mass of collyrium in battle, by his
sharp arrows, like a cloud by the rays of the sun.

Then, Nikumbha the swift-handed demon again wounded Nila by a hundred arrows in the
battle and laughed continuously.

Nila chopped the head of the charioteer of Nikumbha by the wheel of the same chariot
in that fight, as Vishnu the Lord of preservation (by his Chakra, a circular missile weapon) in a
battle.

Even Dvivida, whose impact was like a flash of lightening of a thunder bolt, struck
Ashaniprabha with a rock before the eyes of all the demons.

That Ashaniprabha wounded Dvivida the monkey leader by his thunder bolt-like arrows,
while Dvivida was fighting with trees in the battle.

With his limbs struck by arrows, that Dvivida agitated as he was by anger, struck
with a Sala tree, Ashaniprabha, his chariot and the horses.

Vidyunmali, seated in a chariot, struck Sushena repeatedly with arrows adorned with
gold and made a roaring sound.

Sushena the excellent monkey, seeing him mounted on a chariot, quickly caused the
chariot to fall down, by a huge rock.

Retreating soon from the chariot, Vidyunmali the demon endowed with a skill, stood
on the ground with a mace in his hand.

Then, the excellent monkey, Sushena engulfed as he was with anger, seizing a very
huge rock in his hands, chased that demon.

Vidyunmali the ranger of the night; struck that approaching Sushena the excellent
monkey, quickly with a mace on his chest.

Not minding that terrific blow with the mace in the great battle, Sushena the
excellent monkey silently threw that huge rock on his chest.

Struck by the thump of that rock, Vidyunmali the demon, his chest crushed, fell
lifeless on the earth.

Those strong demons were destroyed thus by those valiant monkeys there in a series
of hand to hand encounters, as the demons were destroyed by the blows of the celestials.

The battle-field became frightening with extra-ordinary spears, other arrows, maces,
javelins, lances and some other weapons with three points, shattered chariots and military steeds
elephants in rut, monkeys and demons which had been killed, wheels axles and yokes broken and lying
on the ground and frequented as it was by herds of jackals.

The headless trunks of monkeys and demons sprang up here and there in the midst of
that tumultuous conflict, which resembled the war between celestials and demons.

Then, the rangers of the night, with their limbs anointed with blood after being
attacked by the excellent monkeys, longed for sun-set and again with strength, assembled for a good
combat.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing Mahodara and Mahaparshva the demons having been killed, and that valiant and
mighty Virupaksha struck down in that great battle, a tremendous anger took possession of Ravana.
He urged on his charioteer and addressed to him the following words:

"Killing those two princes, Rama and Lakshmana, I will remove surely the sorrow
caused to me on account of the ministers who have been killed and the city which has been laid
siege to (by the monkeys)."

"In the battle, I will cut down the tree in the shape of Rama, which is going to
yield fruit through its flower in the form of Seetha, whose principal branches are Sugreeva,
Jambavan, Kumuda, Nala, Dvivida, Mainda, Angada, Gandhamadana, Hanuma, Sushena and all the chiefs
of monkey-warriors."

Ravana, the mighty and the surpassing Chariot-Warrior, went quickly, making a noise
in all the ten directions, with the sound of the chariot, rushing towards Rama.

Filled with that sound, the entire earth, with its rivers, mountains and forests,
trembled, throwing lions, antelopes and birds, into fright.

He employed very highly terrific and exceedingly frightful mystic missile called
Tamasa, which began to consume all the monkeys, who started falling down on all sides.

Dust began to fly up from the earth, while those frustrated monkeys were fleeing
away for they could no longer bear that missile built by Brahma himself.

Seeing those hundreds of many of his armies shattered by excellent arrows of Ravana,
Rama took his stand, ready for the battle.

Having driven away the army of monkeys, Ravana the foremost among the demons then
saw Rama, the annihilator of his enemies, who was endowed with long arms and eyes as wide as lotus
petals standing unconquered with his brother Lakshmana-like Indra the lord of celestials is seen
with Vishnu, the supreme lord of preservation-holding up his great bow as though scraping the
sky.

Seeing the disappointed monkeys and Ravana advancing, the mighty Rama who was
endowed with a great splendour and accompanied by Lakshmana who were born in Raghu dynasty, then
pleasingly seized his bow at the middle.

Thereupon, Rama began to stretch his excellent bow, which was endowed with great
force and sonorous, as though he was breaking the earth asunder.

Then, due to that buzzing sound produced by the streams of Ravana's arrows as also
by the twang of Rama's bow, those demons fell down in their hundreds.

That Ravana, coming within the range of arrow-shots of Rama and Lakshmana, resembled
Rahu (the demon who is supposed to seize the sun and the moon), standing in the vicinity of the
moon and the sun.

Wishing to fight him with his sharp arrows at the earliest, Lakshmana stretching his
bow, released his arrows which were like flames of fire.

Ravana of extra ordinary energy prevented those arrows, the moment they were
released by Lakshmana, with his arrows, in the sky itself.

Showing the dexterity of his hand, Ravana split the arrows of Lakshmana one with
one, three with three and ten with ten arrows.

Overpassing Lakshmana, Ravana the victorious in battle, approached Rama, who stood
like another mountain, in the battle-field.

Having approached Rama, Ravana the lord of demons, having his eyes turning red-blood
through anger, released streams of arrows upon him.

Just on seeing streams of arrows coming forth, loosed from Ravana's bow, Rama
thereupon quickly seized hold of 'Bhalla'* arrows in haste.

Then, Rama tore off that multitude of arrows, which were blazing and looking very
terrific like enraged serpents, with his sharp Bhalla - arrows.

Rama on Ravana and Ravana on Rama, quickly showered each other with streams of
sharp-pointed arrows of various kinds.

Pushing back each other with the velocity of their arrows and remaining undefeated,
the two warriors described circles of different kinds each moving from left to right, for a long
time.

Created beings were frightened, even as both the terrific warriors were fighting all
at once, releasing their arrows at each other, thus resembling the god of retribution and the god
of Death respectively.

The sky at that time became dense with arrows of various kinds, even as it is
covered, at the end of the monsoon, with clouds crowded with crowns of lightning.

The sky was studded as with eye-holes, by showers of arrows of high velocity, which
were extremely sharp-pointed and adorned with plumes of vultures and were loosed with high
speed.

They initially made the sky dark with arrows. Even after the sun-set, they made it
dark, like two huge clouds risen in it.

A great combat ensued between both of them, who were willing to kill each other.
That battle was unimaginable and unapproachable, like the duel that took place between Vritra the
demon and Indra the lord of celestials.

Both the warriors were excellent archers. Both were skilled in war-fare. Both were
eminently skilled in the use of missiles. Both moved unhindered in the battle-field.

In whichever course both of them went, in the same respective direction, streams of
arrows went, like waves in two oceans, whipped by the wind.

Ravana, having skilful hands and a cause for the cry of the world, released a row of
steel arrows on Rama's forehead.

Rama endured on his head, that row of steel arrows, having a lustre of black
lotus-petals, discharged from the terrific bow. He did not get perturbed.

Thereupon, seizing hold of more arrows, reciting sacred incantations and making use
of the missile presided over by Rudra and stretching his bow, the valiant Rama of great splendour
was filled with anger and released those arrows.

Fallen on the unbreakable armour of Ravana, which looked like a large cloud, those
arrows could not cause any pain to him at that time.

Rama, who was skilled in the use of all types of mystic missiles, forthwith pierced
in the forehead, yet again by a paramount missile, that Ravana seated in his chariot.

Having pierced the frames of arrows of Ravana, Rama's arrows penetrated like
five-headed hissing serpents into the earth, when rebuffed by Ravana.

Striking down Rama's missile, that Ravana, who was stupefied with anger, employed
another exceedingly terrific missile presided over by demoniac forces.

He released sharp arrows, having the heads of lions and tigers, those of buzzards
and crows, even of vultures and faloons, as well as those of jackals and wolves, arrows with their
mouths wide open, having the heads of venomous snakes with five heads, bringing fear.

Hissing like a serpent provoked to anger Ravana who was endowed with extraordinary
energy and conjuring tricks, released towards Rama these and other arrows, having the heads of
donkeys, those of boars, dogs and cocks as also of alligators and venomous snakes.

Possessed by a missile presided over by demoniac forces, that Rama endowed with a
great strength and resembling the god of fire, released a missile presided over by the god of
fire.

Rama employed there, various kinds of arrows, with heads bright as fire, others with
heads shining like the sun, the moon, the crescent, a comet, others shining like planets, lunar
mansions and a huge meteor and some arrows resembling flashes of lightning.

Struck by Rama's missile, the terrific arrows of Ravana got destroyed in the sky and
fell down in thousands of pieces.

Rejoiced to see that missile struck down by Rama, who was unweary in action, all the
valiant monkeys, who were capable of changing their form at will, then encompassing Rama, raised a
clamour, facing Sugreeva.

Striking down with force that missile which came forth from Ravana's arms, the
great-souled Rama, then was filled with rejoice while the chiefs of monkeys, full f joy, shouted
loudly.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Looking at Ayodhya, Rama, a scion of Raghu dynasty, for his part, who wished to do a
kindly act and who was quick in exhibiting prowess, contemplated thereupon to do a kindly act.

Having thus contemplated, the sagacious and the glorious Rama then cast his glimpse
on the monkeys and spoke to Hanuma, the monkey (as follows):

"O the foremost of the monkeys! Going with all speed to Ayodhya, find out whether
the people there, are safe in the royal palace.

"Reaching then to Shrigaberapura, communicate in my name, about my welfare to Guha,
the king of Nishadas, a wild tribe living in the forest."

"Guha will be pleased to hear about me, as being safe, healthy and free from
trouble. He is my friend, as well as my own self."

Feeling pleased, Guha, the lord of Nishadas, the wild tribe, will tell the path to
Ayodhya and the news about Bharata."

"Bharata too is to be asked by you, the news about his welfare, in my name. Tell him
of me as having returned, accomplished of our object, with my consort and Lakshmana."

"Tell him about the abduction of Seetha by the mighty Ravana, my conversation with
Sugreeva and the killing of Vali in combat."

"Tell him also about the search for Seetha and how she was traced out by you, after
crossing the never-diminishing ocean, having extensive waters."

"Tell him about our going near the ocean, the appearance of the ocean, how the
bridge was constructed there and how Ravana was killed."

"Tell him about the bestower of boons by Indra the lord of celestials, by brahma the
lord of creation, and by Varuna the lord of waters, my meeting with my (deceased) father, through
the grace of Shiva the Supreme Deity."

"O gentle Hanuma! Inform to Bharata, of me as having come near Ayodhya, along with
Vibhishana and Sugreeva the lord of monkeys."

"Tell him, that having conquered hosts of enemies and obtained an excellent fame, is
purpose having been accomplished, Rama is coming near, with is mighty friends."

"It is also to be observed by you, about the facial expression which Bharata wears,
after hearing all this and also all that he intends to do in relation to me."

"All the occurrences there are to be known. All the gestures of Bharata are to be
ascertained through the colour of his face, glances and the speech."

"Whose mind does not turn round, with a kingdom abundantly rich in all coveted
enjoyments, teeming with elephants horses and chariots and which is in herited from one's
father?"

"Having been associated with the kingdom for long, if the illustrious Bharata is
longing for it himself, let Bharata rule the entire kingdom in one piece."

"O Hanuma! Understanding his mind and perception, you ought to return quickly,
before we are not gone for a long distance towards Ayodhya."

Assuming a human form, when thus commanded by Rama, Hanuma the son of wind-god,
swiftly left for Ayodhya.

Hanuma, the son of wind-god then flew up with speed towards Ayodhya, as Garuda the
eagle would fly with speed, while seeking to catch a large snake.

Leaping into the auspicious sky, the dwelling place of birds, duly crossing over the
terrific conjunction of Ganga and Yamuna rivers, reaching Shringaverapura and approaching Guha (the
chief of Nishadas), that valiant Hanuma spoke the following words in a charming voice:

"Along with Seetha and Lakshmana, Rama, your friend, that scion of Kakutthsa, of
true prowess, has for his part enquired of your welfare."

"You can see Rama here itself today, when he has been duly permitted by Bharadwaja
the sage, after spending, at the instance of the sage, for a night of the fifth lunar day (of the
bright half of the month of Ashvayuja)."

That swift-moving Hanuma, with his rejoicingly feather-like body and with a great
splendor, not thinking of his fatigue, sprang up with a great speed.

Hanuma saw, on the way, Ramatirtha, a place of descent into the river (hallowed by
the association of Lord Parashurama), as well as the rivers Valukini, Varuthini and Gomati as also
the formidable forest of Sala trees, many thousands of people and numerous communities.

Going quickly for a long distance, that foremost of the monkeys reached trees in
flowering, near Nandigrama and looking like those comprised in the garden of Kubera (known by the
name, Chitraratha) and frequented by women along with their sons and elders, charmingly adorned as
they were.

At a distance of two miles from Ayodhya Hanuama saw Bharata, living in a hermitage,
with the bark trees and the skin of a black antelope wrapped round his waist, looking miserable and
emaciated, wearing matted locks on his head, his limbs coated with dirt, afflicted through
separation from Rama his elder brother, subsisting on roots and fruits, with his senses subdued,
engaged in austerities, protecting virtue, with a very high head of matted hair, covering his body
with the bark of trees and a deer skin, disciplined, whose thoughts were fixed on the Supreme
Spirit, with a splendour equalling that of a Brahmanical sage, ruling the earth after placing the
wooden sandals before him, protecting the people belonging to all the four grades (viz. Brahmans
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Shudras) from all peril and attended by the upright ministers, priests and
by clever troop-commanders, all clad in saffron robes.

Those citizens, who were all fond of righteousness, were not willing to enjoy
pleasures, ignoring that prince clad in the bark of trees and the skin of a black antelope.

With joined palms in salutation, Hanuma the son of wind-god spoke as follows to that
Bharata, who knew what is right and seemed to be a second Dharma (the god of virtue) clothed with a
body of virtue:

"Rama, for whom you are repenting residing as he was in the forest of Dandaka
wearing the bark of trees and matted locks, has enquired about your welfare."

"O Lord! I am telling you a pleasant news. Give up this dreadful anguish. Within a
while, you will be meeting Rama, your elder brother."

"Having killed Ravana and got back Seetha, Rama is returning with his mighty
friends, his purpose duly accomplished."

"Lakshmana too, who is endowed with extraordinary energy, is coming intact with
Seetha, the illustrious princess of Videha territory and with Rama as Sachi (the wife of Indra)
would with the mighty Indra the lord of celestials."

Hearing the words of Hanuma, Bharata the son of Kaikeyi, felt delighted and sank all
at once to the ground as also fainted through joy.

Thereupon, Bharata who was born in Raghu dynasty, got up from the swoon within a
while and regaining his consciousness, spoke the following words to Hanuma, who spoke pleasant
tidings to him.

Embracing Hanuma with eagerness, the illustrious Bharata bathed him with copious
tear-drops born of delight and as such, other than those born of anguish.

"O the gentle one! Are you a divine being or a human being, who have come here out
of compassion? To you, who have given this agreeable news to me, I shall give in return, for the
pleasant tidings, a hundred thousand cows, a hundred best villages, and for wives, sixteen golden
complexioned virgin girls of a good conduct, decked with ear-rings, having beautiful noses and
thighs, adorned with all kinds of jewels, with charming countenances as delightful as the moon and
born in a noble family."

Hearing the news of Rama's arrival resembling a womnder, from Hanuma, Bharata the
prince felt overjoyed by a desire to see Rama and spoke the following words again with delight:
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing those words of Vibhishana, Rama, agonized as he was with grief, could not
understand clearly what was spoken by that demon.

Then, Rama the conqueror of the cities of enemies, leaning upon his courage, spoke
to Vibhishana who was sitting nearby and in front of the monkeys (as follows):

"O lord of demons! I wish to hear again those of the words spoken by you. I desire
to hear again, whatever you intend to tell me."

Hearing those words of Rama, spoken very sadly, that Vibhishana who was skilled in
expression, again spoke his words gently as follows:

"O the long armed hero! Immediately after your orders, the marshalling of the troops
was done by me in the manner as enjoined by you."

"All those armies were divided and positioned at all places. Even the commanders of
those divisions were arrayed and distributed according to their ranks."

"O great lord! I have to report to you something further. Listen to it. While you
are lamenting without any cause, we feel painful at our hearts."

"O king! Abandon this lamentation and false grief which came to you. Let your worry,
which augments the pleasure of your adversaries be therefore abandoned."

"O hero! If you want to get back Seetha and if the demons are to be destroyed, raise
up for the occasion. Keep yourself cheerful."

"O Rama! Listen to my benign words I tell you. This Lakshmana together with a large
army should go soon to kill Indrajit, who reached Nikumbhila, with arrows as deadly as the
serpentine poison released from his snake-like bow in battle."

"By his penance, Indrajit obtained a weapon called Brahmashira, by way of a gift
from Brahma and also horses, which are coursing at his will."

"That Indrajit, as such along with his army, is reported to have reached Nikumbhila.
If he comes forth after completing his sacrificial act, know that all of us as killed."

"A boon was given by Brahma to that intelligent demon as follows: "O Indrajit! That
enemy of yours, who strikes while you are marching with your bow drawn, and while you have not
arrived at Nikumbhila, or even while you have not offered oblations to the sacred fire, will prove
to be the cause of your killing."

"O mighty Rama! Give your command for killing of Indrajit. When he is killed, know
that Ravana along with his associate troops also as killed."

Hearing the words of Indrajit, Rama then spoke the following words:"O Vibhishana of
true prowess! I know the conjuring trick of that terrific demon."

"That Indrajit is skilled in the use of the mystic missile presided over by Brahma.
He is intelligent. He is a master of several conjuring tricks. He is so mighty that he can render
unconscious in battle even the gods along with Varuna the king of gods."

"O highly illustrious hero! While he drifts in the sky, ascending his chariot, his
movement is not known to others, as the sun is not seen beneath a dense mass of clouds."

Having known the toughness of the conjuring tricks of the evil-minded adversary,
Rama spoke to the illustrious Lakshmana as follows:

"O Lakshmana! You, accompanied by that entire army which stands at the disposal of
Sugreeva, along with troop-commanders with Hanuma as their head; and protected by Jambavan the lord
of bears, who will be accompanied by his army, kill that Indrajit the prince of demons, rich in the
power of conjuring tricks."

"The great souled Vibhishana, who knows all the conjuring tricks of Indrajit, along
with his counsellors, will follow behind you."

Hearing the words of Rama, Lakshmana of highly wonderful prowess, along with
Vibhishana, took hold of his excellent bow.

The rejoiced Lakshmana who was prepared for the combat, clad in an armour, wielding
a sword and arrows, wearing his bow in his left hand and having touched Rama's feet in salutation,
spoke as follows:

"Today, the arrows released from my bow, piercing Indrajit, will drop into the City
of Lanka, as swans descend into a louts-pond.

"Now itself, my arrows discharged from the bow-string of this great bow, duly
splitting his terrific body, will blow him away."

Thus speaking in front of his brother, that resplendent Lakshmana, quickly marched
forward, with an intent to kill Indrajit.

Offering salutation to the feet of his brother and doing circumambulation too, that
Lakshmana went to the sanctuary named Nikumbhila, which was protected by Indrajit.

Having obtained the blessings from his brother, the glorious Lakshmana, the prince,
quickly sallied forth along with Vibhishana.

Then, Hanuma accompanied by many a thousand of monkeys and Vibhishana along with his
counsellors went behind Lakshmana.

That Lakshmana, quickly surrounded by a large army of monkeys, saw the army of
Jambavan also stationed in the way.

After covering a long distance, that Lakshmana, the delight to his friends, saw the
army of Ravana, ranged in battle-array, from a distance.

Duly arriving at Nikumbhila, that foe-conquering Lakshmana stood, bow in hand, to
conquer that Indrajit, the possessor of conjuring tricks, in conformity with Brahma's
ordinance.

The valiant Lakshmana stood there along with Vibhishana, the heroic Angada and
Hanuma, the son of wind-god.

Lakshmana penetrated that heterogeneous army of enemies, resplendent with spotless
weapons, thick with ensigns and abounded with huge chariots, exceedingly impenetrable, very
terrific, with unimaginable swiftness, even as one would enter a thick veil of darkness.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Thus directed by Rama, Hanuma the son of wind-god, entered deeply into the City of
Lanka, being respectfully received by the demons.

That Hanuma, the monkey, known to Seetha, having entered the City of Lanka, seeking
permission from Vibhishana, getting approval from him and entering Ashoka grove as per the
prevailing regulation, saw at the foot of a tree, Seetha, who was bereft of freshness, looking
joylessly like a frightened cow and surrounded with female-demons. Approaching her humbly by
offering salutation to her in bending his head, he stood there silently.

Even after seeing the mighty Hanuma who came there, Seetha kept herself silent.
Then, seeing and recollecting him, she became rejoiced.

Seeing her cool face, Hanuma the excellent monkey began to narrate the entire
message of Rama.

"O Seetha! Rama is well, together with Sugreeva and Lakshmana, along with Vibhishana
as his supporter and collectively with the army of monkeys."

"O the divine lady! Having destroyed his enemy, Rama the annihilator of his
adversaries, having accomplished his object, is informing you about his welfare. Rama and
Lakshmana, with the support of Vibhishana and the monkeys, killed the valiant Ravana."

"O the divine lady! I am telling a pleasant news and again eulogizing you. O Seetha,
the knower of righteousness! Rama accomplished this great victory in the battle, because of your
power. Be free from your grief and be comfortable."

"Ravana, the enemy was killed. Even the Lanka has been subdued. With a firm
determination to win you back, by me who have had no sleep, a bridge has been constructed across
the great ocean and this vow (of winning you back) has been fulfilled."

"You ought not to have any fear, living as you do in Ravana's abode. This kingdom of
Lanka has now been placed indeed under the dominion ship of Vibhishana."

"That is why, console yourself complacently. You are staying in your own house. This
Vibhishana too is coming to you with a rejoice, as he is so eager to see you."

Hearing these words, that Seetha the divine lady, whose face resembled the moon,
could not speak, tongue-tied as she was with a thrill of delight.

Thereupon, Hanuma spoke to Seetha, who was not making any answer (as follows): "O
divine lady! What are you reflecting upon? Why don't you speak to me?"

Thus asked by Hanuma, Seetha, who was ever established in a righteous path, was very
much delighted and spoke (as follows) in a voice choked with tears.

"Hearing these pleasant tidings about the victory of my husband, I became speechless
for a while, overpowered as I was, by extreme joy."

"O, Hanuman! I indeed do not see any appropriate thing here, which pleases you in
return, to offer you, who have announced these tidings pleasant to me, even after enervating my
brain."

"Nor, do I perceive anything worthy for you on this earth for you act of conveying
this agreeable news to me and on bestowing which on you, happiness may come to me."

"Neither silver, nor gold nor even diamonds nor the sovereignty of the three worlds,
can be worthy of this message."

Hearing the words of Seetha, Hanuma standing with his face turned towards Seetha and
with his hands joined in salutation, joyfully replied as follows:

"O faultless lady, interested in things agreeable and beneficial to husband and
wishing for his victory! You alone deserve to speak such words filled with affection."

"O gentle lady! These words of yours, endowed with preciousness and affection, are
better than various kinds of collection of diamonds or the sovereignty over the celestials."

"I see Rama victorious and happy, he having killed the enemies and having obtained
victory. That is to say, I have attained the blessing like the sovereignty over the celestials and
other good qualities."

Hearing those words of Hanuma, Seetha the daughter of Janaka thereupon spoke the
following auspicious words to Hanuma.

"You alone can utter these words, endowed with exceedingly good attributes,
embellished with a grace of style and filled with an intelligence, consisting of eight
excellences.*"

"You are a praiseworthy and supremely virtuous son of the wind-god. Numerous good
qualities are there in you along (as follows, along with others): strength, valour, knowledge of
scriptures, vigour, prowess, superlative skill (in action), spirit, forbearance, firmness,
stability and re is no humility. There is no doubt about it."

Thereafter, having joined his hands together in salutation, standing in front of
Seetha in humility and free from flurry, Hanuma again spoke to Seetha (as follows):

"If you permit me, I wish to kill of all these notorious female-demons, by whom you
have been frightened earlier."

"These cruel female-demons of terrific form and behavior, with still more cruel
eyes, having ugly faces, were heard by me here speaking again and again harsh words to you, who are
so devoted to your husband, at Ravana's command, when you were suffering hardships in the Ashoka
grove, O divine lady!"

"I wish to kill with various kinds of strokes, these cruel, extremely rough and
deformed female-demons, with distorted features and terrific hairs and eyes, talking together
roughly. (Pray) grant this boon to me."

"I wish to kill the female-demons, who have spoken harsh words to you and wronged
you, striking them down with my fists, hand-blows, long arms, blows of my shanks and knees, by
causing pain to their teeth, biting off their ears and nose and pulling out their hair, making them
severely dry-mouthed, tearing them off, leaping over them, encountering them and throwing down
their bodies, with their burst cheeks, necks, shoulders and ribs."

"O illustrious lady! Striking them with several blows in this way, I would destroy
the female-demons of terrible form, by whom you have been threatened in the past."

Reflecting as pondering for a while, when spoke thus by Hanuma, the compassionate
Seetha, who was kind to the miserable, spoke to Hanuma as follows:

"O the foremost of monkey! Who will be angry with servant-maids, who are dependent
on their king's command and work in obedience to the orders of others?"

"All this is reaped by me, as a consequence of my bad fortune or an account of a
misdeed committed by me in the past. The fruit of one's own making is indeed experienced (in one's
life)."

"O the great-armed Hanuma! Do not speak like this. This is indeed a great divine
strategy. It was ordained that this type of situation is to be obtained by me, due to the
application of fate. Feeble as I am in these matters, I am forgiving the servant-maids of Ravana
here."

"O Hanuma! As commanded by Ravana the threatened me. As he is dead now, they will
not do the threatening."

"O Hanuma! There is an old axim possessed of merit, actually uttered by a bear in
the presence of a tiger. Hear it from me."

"A superior person does not take into account the sin of those who have committed an
offence evil for evil must be carried out at all costs virtuous persons account good conduct as an
ornament."

"Kindness is to be shown by a noble person either towards a sinner or to a virtuous
person or even to a person who deserves death, for, there is none who never commits a wrong."

"No evil is to be done, even to those cruel persons of sinful deeds, who take
pleasure to harm the life of others and continue to perpetrate their sinful acts."

Hearing the words of Seetha, Hanuma who was skilled in speech, then replied to the
faultless Seetha, Rama's consort (as follows):

"O divine lady! You are the apt wife of Rama, full of virtue. Give me a message in
return. I will go to the place where Rama is."

Thus spoken by Hanuma, that Seetha the daughter of Janaka spoke as follows: "O the
foremost of monkeys! I long to see my husband."

Hearing those words of Seetha, the highly intelligent Hanuma, the son of wind-god,
bringing delight to Seetha, spoke the following words:

"You shall see today, Rama whose countenance is like a full moon, whose friends
(like Sugreeva and Vibhishana) are alive, whose enemies have been killed along with Lakshmana, as
Shachi (the consort of Indra) would see Indra the lord of gods."

Thus speaking to that Seetha, who appeared radiant before his eyes as Lakshmi the
goddess of prosperity, Hanuma of great splendor, came to the place where Rama was.

Then, Hanuma the excellent of monkeys speedily narrated, in order of sequence, the
message given by Seetha, to Rama who was equal to Indra the chief of celestials.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the words of Mahodara, Kumbhakarna rebuked him and then spoke to his
brother, Ravana, the chief of demons (as follows):

"By annihilation of that evil-minded Rama, I will wipe-off your terrifc fear today.
Be happy, indeed without any enmity."

"Warriors do not roar in vain as waterless clouds. Hear my roar, only on completion
of my said task in battle."

"Warriors do not indulge in eulogizing themselves. They do difficult acts, without a
show."

"O Mahodara! Your words may be agreeable to those kings who are confused, who fancy
themselves as the learned, and who themselves are stupid."

"You are all cowards in battle. You always speak pleasantly and go according to the
wishes of the king. You, as such, have spoiled all the undertakings."

"Having access to this king, who has friends merely for a name-sake as also behaving
unfriendly, the treasury got depleted, the army destroyed and king alone is left the Lanka."

"Intent on conquering the enemy, I sally for the battle today to set right your
imprudent policy."

Hearing the words of the intellectual Kumbhakarna, Ravana the king of demons,
bursting into laughter, replied as follows:

"O dear brother, well-versed in the art of war-fare! This Mahodara is frightened of
Rama. There is no doubt. He is not indeed inclined of a war."

"O Kumbhakarna! None is equal to you in friendship and strength, in my eyes. You
march to the battlefield for destroying the enemies and for achieving victory."

"O destroyer of enemies! You, who were sleeping, were awakened by me, for the
purpose of destroying the enemies. This is indeed a grand time for our demons."

"Therefore, go like Yama the god of death, by taking a dart and a noose in your
hand. Devour the monkeys and the princes whose splendour is like that of the sun."

"By seeing your very form, the monkeys will run away. The hearts of Rama and
Lakshmana will get broken asunder."

Ravana, the king of demons, having a great energy, thus speaking to the mighty
Kumbhakarna, thought himself as though he was born again.

The king, knowing the strength and prowess of Kumbhakarna, was delighted and became
as bright as the moon.

Some were drowned in the ocean. Some had recourse into the caves. Some others
escaped. Some could not even stand stable on the ground. Some fell down. Some lied down, as though
they were dead.

Kumbhakarna, the annihilator of enemies, speedily took up a sharp spike fully made
of iron, adorned with pure gold and splendidly shining.

Taking hold of that large spike tinted with the blood of enemies, shining like
Indra's thunderbolt and equally heavy, capable of tormenting celestials, demons, Gandharvas, the
celestial musicians, Yakshas a class of demi-gods and Nagas the celestial serpents, wreathed in
garlands of crimson flowers with excessive splendour and emitting flames by itself naturally,
Kumbhakarna of great brilliance spoke to Ravana the following words:

"Let this large army stay back here. I shall go all alone. Being angry with hunger,
I shall devour those monkeys now."

Hearing the words of Kumbhakarna, Ravana said, "Go along with army, with their
spikes and hammers in hand."

"The monkeys, with their huge bodies, valiant, with a much determination and with
their teeth, will destroy anyone who is either alone or off one's guard."

"Therefore, go along with your troops as a person who is very difficult to be
assaulted. Destroy the entire enemy-side, which in inimical to our demons."

Rising up swiftly from his throne, Ravana endowed with a great energy, then placed
around the neck of Kumbhakarna, a necklace studded with a course of jewels.

Ravana placed on the person of Kumbhakarna, armlets, rings, excellent jewellery and
a handsome chain.

Ravana arranged for ornamentation of his limbs with beautiful and sweet-smelling
garlands as well as ear-rings to his ears.

Kumbhakarna with large ears, adorned with golden armlets and bracelets worn on his
upper arms along with ornament for his breast, shone like fire, well-fed with oblations.

With a large, black and shining string worn round his loins, he was looking like
Mount Mandara encircled by a serpent at the time of churning the ambrosia.

Secured with a golden armour, carrying a great load, impenetrable by weapons and as
if blazing with its own splendour with flashing like lightning, Kumbhakarna shone as a king of
Mountains, enveloped by clouds at sunset.

Adorned with all ornaments to all his limbs and with a spike in his hand, that demon
shone like Narayana, the all-embracing Lord, enthusiastic to take the three long strides (which
were meant to cover the entire universe).

Embracing his brother and even circumambulating him, the mighty Kumbhakarna sallied
forth, after offering salutation to him by bowing down to him respectfully.

Ravana sent off the mighty Kumbhakarna, having a colossal body, who was then
sallying forth, with a great sound (of drums and musical instruments) and with laudable
benedictions.

With loud sounds of counches and kettle-drums, with an army wielding excellent
weapons, with elephants, with horses and with chariots making sounds of clouds, mighty charioteers
accompanied him who was the foremost among the charioteers.

Those demons followed that terrific and mighty Kumbhakarna, mounting on serpents,
camels donkeys, lions, elephants, wild beasts and birds.

That Kumbhakarna, the enemy of ogres and celestials, wielding a sharp spike in his
hand, while sallying forth, over whose head a parasol was held and drink and intoxicated by the
smell of blood.

Many demons, possessing a great energy and great strength, with terrific forms and
fearful eyes, as also wielding weapons in their hands, accompanied him as foot-soldiers.

The demons followed, with their red hot eyes, large colossal bodies resembling a
mass of collyrium in hue, lifting up spikes, swords, sharp axes, javelins, iron rods, maces,
mallets, enormous trunks of palmyrah trees to be hurled at and difficult to be met.

Then, that Kumbhakarna, of a great splendour and a great strength, assuming another
body of a formidable and terrific form, with a breadth of a hundred bows and six hundred bows in
height, with his eyes resembling the wheels of a cart, looking like a huge mountain and terrible to
look at, sallied forth.

Kumbhakarna with his colossal body and a huge mouth, looking like a scorched hill,
approaching the demons and laughing loudly, spoke as follows:

"Charged with anger, I shall burn up those troops of the foremost of monkeys, in
lots today, as a flash of fire would burn up the moths."

"The monkeys who are in the habit of roaming about in the woods, have not offended
me of their own accord. That race of monkeys serves as an embellishment for the urban gardens in a
city like ours."

"Rama, together with Lakshmana, is the root-cause for the attack on our city. If he
is killed, all will be destroyed. Therefore, I shall kill that Rama in battle."

While Kumbhakarna was speaking in that way, the demons made a very terrific noise,
as though they were agitating the ocean.

As that intelligent Kumbhakarna was sallying forth quickly for the battle, omens of
terrific patterns appeared on all sides.

Clouds, ashy in colour like asses, combined with meteors and strokes of lightning
appeared. Even the earth trembled, together with its oceans and forests.

Jackals of terrific form howled with flaming morsels in their mouths and birds
twirled in circles from right to left.

A vulture descended on the spike of Kumbhakarna, as he was sallying forth along the
road. His left eye twitched and his left arm throbbed.

Then, a blazing meteor fell down with a dreadful noise. Even the sun became
lusterless and the wind was not blowing comfortably.

Disregarding those great portents indicated, causing the hair to stand erect,
Kumbhakarna on his part marched on, driven by the power of fate.

Kumbhakarna, looking like a mountain, traversing the rampart with his feet alone,
saw a wonderful army of monkeys, looking similar to a thick coverage of clouds.

Seeing that Kumbhakarna, the excellent among demons, looking equal to a mountain,
the monkeys then ran away to all directions, as clouds are driven away by the wind.

Looking towards that highly fierce army of monkeys, running away to different
quarters, as a net-work of broken clouds, that Kumbhakarna with the hue of a black cloud, highly
rejoiced, repeatedly emitted a roar-like thunder.

Hearing his terrific roar, similar to the rumbling of a cloud in the sky, many of
those monkeys fell down on the ground, like Sal trees cut-up by the roots.

Wielding a large iron rod for the destroyable of the enemies, that gigantic
Kumbhakarna looked like Yama the lord of death armed with a rod of punishment, waiting upon him as
his attendant at the time of dissolution of the world and caused a great terrific fear to the
troops of monkeys.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing Narantaka dying, Devantaka, Trishira and Mahodara the son of Pulastya the
foremost of demons, wept.

Mounting an excellent elephant, resembling a cloud, Mahodara hurrily attacked Angada
of great energy.

The strong Devantaka, tormented at his brother's calamity, then taking a terrific
iron rod, ran towards Angada.

Thereupon, the valiant Trishira, mounting a chariot resembling the sun and yoked
with excellent horses, marched towards Angada.

That Angada, being attacked by the three chief demons, who were capable of smashing
the pride of celestials, uplifted a tree with its large boughs.

The valiant Angada hurled that large tree with big branches quickly on Devantaka as
Indra the lord of celestials would a blazing thunderbolt.

Trishira chopped off that tree with arrows looking like serpents. Seeing the tree
chopped off, that Angada then sprang up.

Thereupon, that foremost of monkeys streamed forth trees and rocks. The enraged
Trishara chopped them off with his sharp arrows.

That Mahodra broke those trees with the tip of his club. Trishira too with his
arrows attacked the valiant Angada.

Marching ahead quickly towards Angada on an elephant, the enraged Mahodara struck on
his chest with javelins looking like thunderbolts.

Then, the enraged Devantaka with a speed, approached Angada, struck him quickly with
a club and went off to a distance.

Eventhough attacked at the same time by those three foremost of demons, that Angada
of great prowess and splendour, did not get alarmed.

The speedy and quite unconquerable Angada, acting with a great swiftness and
attacking well, struck Devantaka's elephant with his palm.

By that blow of Angada in battle, the eyes of that royal elephant fell down and that
elephant died.

Pulling out a tusk of that elephant in battle, the mighty Angada ran towards
Devantaka quickly and struck him.

That energetic Devantaka swayed to and fro in disorder, like a tree being tossed up
by the wind and emitted plenty of blood with the colour of a lacquer.

Thereafter, the strong Devantaka of great splendour, recovering his breath with a
great difficulty, then struck Angada violently, by firmly holding an iron rod.

Then, Angada the son of king Vali, struck by the iron rod, fell down on his knees on
the earth, but again jumped up.

While Angada, the son of Vali was jumping up, Trishira struck him with three
terrific and straight-going arrows on his forehead.

Noticing Angada being surrounded by the three demon-warriors, Hanuma and Neela went
there.

Thereupon, Neela then hurled a mountain-peak on Trishira. The intelligent Trishira
the son of Ravana broke it by using his sharp arrows.

That mountain-peak, broken into pieces by a multitude of arrows, with its split up
rocks, fell down with sparks of fire and flames.

Seeing Hanuma rushing with enthusiasm in the battle-front, that strong Devantaka ran
towards him with his iron rod.

Then, Hanuma the foremost of monkeys, while jumping up, struck on the head of
Devantaka rushing upon him with his fist equal to a thunder-bolt.

Then, the valiant and the strong Hanuma struck him on his head. That great ape made
the demons shake with the sound.

That Devantaka, the son of Ravana, with his head crushed and broken by the blow of
the fist, with his teeth and eyes coming out and with his tongue hanging down, swiftly fell down
dead on the earth.

When that Devantaka the mighty chief of demon-warriors and the enemy of celestials
was killed in battle, the enraged Trishira showered a terrible rain of sharp-pointed arrows on
Neela's chest.

Again mounting an elephant resembling a mountain, as the sun mounting Mandara
Mountain, that enraged Mahodara on his part, caused rain of arrows to fall quickly on Neela, like
rumbling cloud with a circle of lightning, showers rain on a mountain.

Thereupon, by the rain of a multitude of arrows, the body of Neela the commander of
the army of monkeys became blown up. Thus the mighty Mahodara then made his loosened limbs
paralyzed.

After regaining consciousness, Neela uplifted a mountain consisting of a number of
trees and then jumping up with a great speed, struck with it on the head of Mahodara.

That Mahodara, then shattered by the fall of that mountain and crushed by that large
elephant too, lost his life and fell down on the earth like a mountain struck by a thunderbolt.

Seeing Mahodara his young paternal uncle killed. Trishira was enraged seized hold of
his bow and struck Hanuma with sharp arrows.

While that enraged Hanuma hurled a mountain-peak, the strong Trishira broke it into
several pieces with his sharp arrows.

Seeing that mountain-peak becoming useless, Hanuma then hurled a volley of trees
towards Trishira in that battle-field.

The valiant Trishira chopped off that volley of trees descending on him, with his
sharp arrows in the sky itself and roared aloud.

Then, the enraged Hanuma on his part, bouncing up, tore asunder with his nails,
Trishira's horse, as a lion tears asunder a large elephant.

Thereupon, Trishira the son of Ravana seizing hold of a spear, as Yama the lord of
death takes in his service Kalaratri, a night of all-destroying time, hurled it on Hanuma.

Capturing that spear coming like a meteor in the sky, Hanuma the foremost of monkeys
broke it, even without its descending on him and roared too.

Seeing that spear of a terrific form broken up by Hanuma, the monkey-troops were
very much delighted and roared aloud like rumbling clouds.

Thereupon, lifting up a sword, Trishira the foremost of demons them dug it into
Hanuma's breast.

Hurt by the thrust of the sword, the valiant Hanuma the son of wind-god, struck
Trishira on his breast, with his palm.

Struck by Hanuma's palm, that Trishira of great splendour fell down unconscious on
the earth with the weapons slipping from his hand.

Hanuma, that large ape, equal to a mountain in size, snatching away that falling
sword of Trishira, roared loudly frightening all the demons there.

Unable to bear that roar, the demon jumped up and struck Hanuma with his fist.

Enraged as he was by the blow of Trishiras's fist, Hanuma seized hold of Trishira
the foremost of demons by his head covered by his diadem.

That enraged Hanuma the son of wind-god chopped off with that sharp sword, his three
heads furnished with diadems and ear-rings, like Indra the lord of celestials chopped off the heads
of Vishvarupa the son of Tvashta.

Those mountain-like heads of Trishira the enemy of Indra, having longish organs of
senses and having fire-like blazing eyes, fell down on earth, as planets and stars drop from the
track of the sun.

When that Trishira, the enemy of celestials, having a prowess equal to that of Indra
was killed, the monkeys made a loud noise. The earth trembled. Then, the demons ran away
everywhere. Seeing Trishira, Mahodara and the invincible Devantaka killed, Matta (Mahaparshva) was
enraged with indignation.

Then, Mahaparshva was holding a large mace, which was resplendent, completely made
of iron, wound round with golden wires, filled with a froth of flesh and blood, satiated with the
blood enemies, the upper most part of which was blazing with splendour, decked with red coloured
garlands and which frightened the elephants supporting the quarters like Airavata, Mahapadma and
Sarvabhauma.

Taking that mace, the enraged Matta, the foremost of demons, went quickly to the
monkeys like the blazing fire at the end of the world.

Then, a strong monkey called Rishabha came jumping and stood in front of that
Mattanika (Mahaparshva), the younger brother of Ravana.

Enraged in seeing that Rishabha, looking like a mountain, standing before him,
Mahaparshva struck him upon his breast with a mace equaling a thunderbolt.

When he struck with his mace, the breast of that Rishabha the foremost of demons was
broken. He then trembled and exuded blood profusely.

That Rishabha, the supreme monkey regained his consciousness after a long while and
enraged as he was with his lips quivering, looked towards Mahaparshva.

That Rishabha, the supreme monkey regained his consciousness after a long while and
enraged as he was with his lips quivering, looked towards Mahaparshva.

With his body drenched in blood, that Mahaparshva suddenly fell unconscious on the
ground, like a tree with its root cut off. Then, taking quickly Mahaparshva's mace, which was
looking like Yama's rod, he roared loudly.

Mahaparshva remained as though he was dead for a while. Springing suddenly after
regaining his consciousness, that demon, whose colour resembled his consciousness, that demon,
whose colour resembled an evening cloud, struck that Rishabha, the son of Varuna the lord of
waters.

That Rishabha fell unconscious for a while on the ground. Rising after regaining
consciousness and tightly holding just the same mace, which was looking like a large mountain-peak,
banged it on Mahapatra in the battle-field.

That terrific mace, reaching the body of Mahaparshva, the fierce demon, the enemy of
celestials, sacrificial rites and Brahmanas, broke his chest. Mahaparshva started exuding copious
blood, as a supreme mountain exudes water full of minerals.

The great souled Rishabha quickly ran towards the mace of that mighty Mahaparshva.
Seizing that dreadful mace and striking it repeatedly on the floor, he struck it on Mahaparshva in
the battle-front.

Struck by his own mace, that Mahaparshva with his teeth and eyes fallen out, fell
down like a mountain struck by a thunderbolt.

When that demon depleted his strength, burst open his eyes, with his long life gone
away and fallen down on the ground, the army of demons ran away.

When that Mahaparshva was killed, that army of demons, which was as extensive as an
ocean, abandoning their weapons in the battle-field, fled for mere lives, like a sea which has
burst its shores.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Beholding those foremost of monkey leaders pointed out by Shuka- the most valiant
Lakshmana; Rama's right arm, his own brother Vibhishana standing close to Rama, the terribly
powerful Sugreeva the king of all monkeys, the strong Angada grandson of Indra the wielder of
thunderbolt, the powerful Hanuman, the imincible Jambavan, Sushena, Kumuda, Nila, Nala the
excellent of monkeys, Gaja, Gavaksha, Sharabha, Mainda and Dvivida- that Ravana - his heart became
agitated a little, was enraged and then abused those two heroes Shuka and Sarana who had completed
their report.

Ravana spoke (the following) excited and harsh words, in a voice choked in anger to
Shuka and Sarana who stood saluting with their faces bent down.

"It is not befitting to utter unpleasant words by dependent ministers to their king
who has the power to mete out any punishment or reward."

"Is it proper for both of you to shower irrelevant praise on our enemies who are
adverse to us and are approaching for a war?"

"In vain have you sat at the feet of your elders, your preceptors and the aged,
since the essence to be followed from political sciences has not been grasped by both of you."

"Or if you have imbibed them, you have not remembered them. You are over-burdened
with ignorance! Being associated with such foolish ministers, it is a miracle that I am still able
to retain my sovereignty."

"Have you no fear of death that you dare address me thus rudely, I whose tongue that
you dare tongue dispenses good and evil?"

"Trees may survive in the forest, even if disturbed by fire. But the guilty cannot
survive, if touched by the royal scepter."

"If my anger is not softened by the services they rendered earlier, I would have
killed thse two miscreants who are praising the band of enemies."

"Keep away from my neighbourhood. Do not be seen anywhere here. I am recollecting
your past services and hence do not wish to kill you. Both of you, who are ungrateful and
unfaithful towards me, are just as dead to me."

Hearing Ravana's words, Shuka and Sarana felt ashamed to see Ravana paid obeisance
to him saying, "Be thou victorious!" and went away.

The demon Ravana spoke to Mahodara who was standing nearby as follows: "Bring me the
spies here quickly."

Hearing those words, Mahodara immediately ordered for the spies. The spies came
hurriedly as per the orders of the king, paid obeisance to him by joining their palms and
approached him, having made a complement expressing their desire to see him victorious.

Then, Ravana the king of demons spoke the following words to those spies, who were
faithful, brave, energetic and free from fear:

"You go from here to investigate about the first impression concerning Rama, as
regards who are his intimate friends and in respect of those who joined on his side with a liking
towards him."

"Find out what are his hours of sleeping and waking and what he intends to do next.
You ought to come here, after acquainting with all this information completely and skillfully."

"An enemy in battle, got known through spies by kings, will be defeated with only a
little of effort."

Those spies on their part delightfully replied, "May it be so", kept Shardula in
their front and made their circumambulation clockwise around Ravana.

Having thus made circumambulation to Ravana the excellent and the distinguished
demon, the spies went to the place where Rama along with Lakshmana were there.

Having gone in a disguised manner, those spies saw Rama and Lakshman together with
Sugreeva and Vibhishana in the neighbourhood of Mountain Suvela.

Seeing that army, those demons became overwhelmed with fear. However, they were
observed by the high-souled Vibhishana the Lord of demons.

Accidentally, the deomons there were caught by Vibhishana, who said that the demon
Shardula among them was wicked and got him alone seized.

That Shardula also, who was going to be killed by the monkeys, was got released by
Rama. The other demons also were got released by Rama, the kind man.

Those demons, harassed by the courageous and the quick-paced monkeys, became
insensible, heaved a sigh and reached back Lanka.

Those spies, who always wander outside and who were valiant rangers of the night,
thereafter approached Ravana and informed him that Rama's army was camping in the vicinity of the
Suvela mountain.
undefined
undefined
undefined

That king, who was dejected and very much distressed, having entered the
ssembly-hall, sat on his pre-eminent seat, snorting like a lion.

That mighty Ravana, who was emaciated for his son's death, having joined both his
palms in salutation, spoke the following words all those chiefs of army:

"Surrounded by the entire elephants and horses, as also graced with columns of
chariots and foot-soldiers, all of you march forward."

"Encircling Rama alone, you have to kill him, by showering streams of arrows upon
him, even as clouds pour showers during the rainy season."

"Or I shall kill Rama, while the world is witnessing it tomorrow, once his limbs are
torn by you with your sharp arrows in the great battle."

Having heard those words of Ravana, those demons sallied forth for the battle, along
with various kinds of armies and speedy chariots.

All those demons hurled iron clubs, sharp-edged spikes, arrows, swords and axes
capable of destroying the life. The monkeys too hurled trees and mountains towards the demons.

Towards sun-rise, that very terrific battle became tumultuous between demons and
monkeys.

Those monkeys and demons then began to strike each other with multi-coloured maces,
darts, swords and axes in the battle.

While the battle was thus in progress, the surprisingly enormous dust was actually
settled down by the streams of blood, proceeding from the demons and mokeys.

With elephants and chariots as their river-banks, with horses as their fish and with
flag-staffs as trees, rivers of blood gushed forth, carrying dead

Then, all those monkeys were drenched in streams of blood. Leaping and bouncing on
the battle-field, the monkey-chiefs broke off flag-staffs, armours, chariots, horses and various
kinds of weapons.

With their sharp teeth and nails, the monkeys tore off the hair, ears, eye-brows and
noses of the demons.

A hundred monkey-chiefs rushed towards each single demon in the battle, even as
birds would rush towards a tree laden with fruits.

Then, the demons resembling mountain in size, struck down the terrific monkeys with
large maces, darts, swords and axes.

The huge army of monkeys, being struck down by the demons, sought refuge in Rama,
the son of Dasaratha, who affords protection.

Thereupon, Rama of great splendour and prowess, taking up his bow and entering the
army of demons, streamed forth showers of arrows.

Those highly terrific demons dared not approach Rama, having entered their ranks,
was scorching them with the flame of his arrows, even as clouds would not approach the scorching
sun in the sky.

Those demons saw the most terrible deeds only of Rama, when they were actually
performed by him in the battle-field, which were difficult to perform for others.

Those demons could not actually see Rama, whle he was shaking their huge army and
blowing away their great chariots, any more than one could see a gale of wind in a forest.

They saw the army torn and pierced with arrows, as also scorched, broken down and
tormented with missiles. They could not see Rama, who was so swift in his martial art.

The demons could not behold Rama hitting their bodies, even as created beings are
not able to see their individual souls resting in their sense-objects.

"Here is Rama, killing the army of elephants. Here is Rama, destroying great
chariot-warriors. Here is Rama, killing foot-soldiers along with horses with his sharp arrows".
Saying so, all those demons struck one another with rage in the battle-field those who were in
similarity of appearance to Rama.

Having been thrown into confusion by the great mystic missile presided over by the
Gandharvas, the celestial musicians; presided over by the Gandharvas, the celestial musicians;
those demons were unable to see Rama, even when he was scorching away their army.

Those demons for their part saw thousands of Rama's in the battle-field, while at
other times, they saw only one Rama in that great battle.

Those demons for their part saw thousands of Ramas in the battle-field; while at
other times, they saw only one Rama in that great battle.

The created beings saw that Rama in the form of a discus, which was killing the
demons on the battle-field, like the "Wheel of Time", for its flame, the arrows for its spokes, his
bow for the felly of the wheel, the twanging of the bow-string and the clanging of the gauntlet for
the sound produced for its revolution, his energy and the virtues for its radiance and the power of
his mystic missiles for its edge.

Within a matter of three hours, with his arrows looking like tongues of flames, Rama
killed an army of demons, capable of changing their form at will, including ten thousands chariots
possessing the swiftness of the wind, eighteen thousand strong elephants, fourteen thousand horses
with their riders and a full two lacs of demons fighting on foot.

Those surviving demons, with their horses killed, with their chariots destroyed,
with thier flag-staffs broken and with broken spirits, rushed back towards the City of Lanka.

That battle-field, with elephants, foot-soldiers and horses killed, looked like a
pleasure-grave of the powerful and the enraged the lord of destruction.

Then, the celestials along with Gandharvas the celestial musicians, holy saints and
great sages acclaimed that feat of Rama, saying "well done, well done!".

Then, the virtuous Rama spoke also to Sugreeva, Vibhishana, Hanuma the monkey,
Jambavan, Mainda the foremost of monkeys and even Dvivida, who were in close proximity to him as
follows "Such wonderful power of this missile exists either with me or with the three-eyed Rudra
the lord of destruction."

Rama, a compeer of Indra the lord of celestials, the great souled, unwearied in the
use of weapons and missiles, having destroyed that army of demons, was applauded by the rejoiced
troops of celestials.
undefined
undefined
undefined
That very strong and powerful Rama the son of Dasaratha ordered ten monkey-generals to 
search for the whereabouts of Indrajit.
Rama the scourger of his enemies ordered both the sons of Sushena, Nila the chief of 
monkeys, Angada the son of Vali, the stron Sharabha, Dvivida, Hanuman, the very strong Sanuprastha, 
Rishabha and Rishabha skandha.
All those monkeys, thrilled with enthusiasm, flung into the air brandishing huge trunks 
of trees in order to explore the ten regions.
Indrajit, the son of Ravana, who was skilled in the use of magic weapons, by means of 
his arrows with great speed, released from his most excellent of bows, arrested the impetuous outbreak 
of the monkeys.
Those monkeys of terrific bound, whose bodes were cruelly pierced by those shafts, were 
unable to see Indrajit in the darkness, as the sun is obscured when veiled in clouds.
Indrajit, the victorious in battle, transfixed Rama and Lakshmana with those arrows that 
lacerated their flesh in great measure.
The bodies of both those warriors, Rama and Lakshmana were densely transfixed with serpentine 
arrows by the enraged Indrajit.
Blood flowed from the wound-marks of both Rama and Lakshmana and both of them shone like 
Kimshuka trees in flowring.
At that instant, though still invisible, Indrajit, Ravana's son, with his inflamed eyes, 
which resembled a mass of collyrium mixed with oil, spoke the following words to those two brothers.
"When I enter into combat, making myself invisible, even Indra the lord of celestials 
is not able to see or approach me. How much less, you two!"
"O, Descendents of Raghu! Having imprisoned you in this net work of arrows furnished 
with heron's feathers, I, yielding myself up to the violence of my wrath, am about to dispatch you to 
the region of Yama the Lord of Death."
Speaking thus to the brothers Rama and Lakshmana, who were aware of righteousness, Indrajit 
pierced them with pointed arrows and shouted too exultantly.
Indrajit, who was as black as a heap of shattered collyrium, stretching his immense bow, 
discharged formidable arrows even once more, in that great fight.
That warrior, Indrajit, who was aware of their vital parts, set up a continual shouting, 
digging sharp arrows into the vital parts of Rama and Lakshmana.
Those two princes, in the forefront of battle, bounded by that net work of arrows in 
the twinkling of an eye, became incapable of even looking up.
Pierced in their vital parts, exhausted, and covered all over with heads of arrows, those 
two mighty and courageous archers fell to the earth, they who were the lords of the earth, shaking violently 
like a pair of flag-staffs in honour of Indra the Lord celestials and freed from their raised of chords.
Those warriors, Rama and Lakshmana, lying on that heroes' bed (on the battle-ground), 
bathed in blood, all their limbs bristling with arrows and extremely injured, felt distressed.
There was not a finger's breadth on their bodies form the tips of their fingers to the 
end of their feet that was not lacerated, implanted and pierced by those arrows.
Struck down by that ferocious demon, who was able to change his shape at will, the hot 
blood gushed forth from both Rama and Lashmana, as water from a spring.
Rama fell first, his vital parts pierced by arrows of the wrathful Indrajit, who had 
formerly vanquished Indra the Lord of celestials.
Indrajit pierced Rama by arrows with golden shafts, with sharp points, which had downward 
movement, which go fast, Narchas, Demi-narachas, Bhallas (with wide tips), Anjalis, Vatsa dantas, Simha 
dantas and those shafts like unto razors.
Throwing asunder his bow bent at three places, adorned with gold, with its string loosened 
away and detached from the hold of his fist, Rama lied down on the battle-ground.
Seeing Rama the excellent man fallen, at a distance of an arrows range, Lakshman became 
hopeless about his own life.
Seeing his elder brother Rama, with his eyes resembling lotus-leaves, having fallen on 
the ground, wounded as he was by a net work of arrows, Lakshmana felt sad.
Beholding that Rama, the monkeys too were in great grief and wept terribly, with their 
eyes filled in tears, being afflicted as they were by sorrow.
Those monkeys with Hanuman in first place gathered at a place and stood surrounding Rama 
and Lakshmana, who wee bound by a net work of arrows and lying down on the battle ground. They were 
disturbed and afflicted sorrow.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then, Rama spoke these harsh words to the ocean: "O, ocean! I will make you dry up
now along with your nethermost subterranean region."

"O, Ocean! A vast stretch of sand will appear, when your water gets consumed by my
arrows; when you get dried up and the creatures inhabiting you get destroyed by me."

"By a gush of arrows released by my bow, our monkeys can proceed to the other shore
even by foot; O, ocean!"

"O, Sea the abode of demons! You are not able to recognize my valor or prowess
through your intelligence .You will indeed get repentance at my hands."

"Fixing an arrow resembling the Rod of Brahma (the creator) charged with a missile
(presided over by Brahama) to his excellent bow, the exceedingly powerful Rama stretched it towards
the sea."

While Rama was stretching that bow, both the heaven and earth suddenly seemed to be
split asunder. Mountains also were shaken.

Darkness enveloped the world. All the quarters were obscured. Lakes and rivers were
soon agitated.

The moon sun and the stars moved obliquely and though the sun's rays lighted the
sky, it was enveloped by darkness and shined with a blaze of hundreds of meteors while thunders
reverberated with an unparalleled sound in the sky.

Series of celestial winds blew in their colossal form and the winds, then sweeping
away the clouds, tore up the trees again and again.

The wind, shattering the mountain peaks, broke off the points of the rocks. Winds of
great velocity struck together in the sky and emitted flashes of radiance proceeding from lightning
with a great sound and then there were great thunders.

The visible creatures cried out along with the thunders. The invisible beings too
gave off a terrific noise. The creatures were overpowered, frightened, agitated, lied down and also
very much anguished. They did not move due to fear.

The great ocean with its waves and water, along with its living creatures including
snakes and demons soon became possessed of a terrific velocity. Due to that speed and swelling of
waters, the ocean crossed beyond the other shore to the extent of a Yojana (eight miles).

Rama born in Raghu dynasty and the annihilator of enemies, did not retreat before
that ocean, which swelled and crossed its limits.

Then, Sagara (the ocean god) himself rose from the middle of the ocean as the sun
rises at dawn from the huge mountain of Meru.

That ocean along with snakes of flaming jaws appeared with a hue of glossy emerald
adorned with gold.

The valiant ocean, the lord of rivers, wearing a wreath of pearls, with his eyes
resembling lotus leaves, bearing a beautiful garland made of all kinds of flowers on his head, with
ornaments of refined gold, adorned with excellent jewels made of pearls from his domain, decorated
with different kinds of gems and metals, resembling Himavat mountain, wearing on his broad chest a
locket shedding a white luster, resembling a Kaustubha gem (adorning the blossom of Lord Vishnu)
and hanging in the middle of a single string of pearls, with a multitude of waves whirled around
him, encircled by the clouds and winds, escorted by rivers mainly the Ganga and Sindhu, endowed
with diverse forms resembling various deities, approached Rama with joined palms, who stood with
arrows in hand, addressing him first as �Rama!' and spoke the following words:

"O, beloved Rama! Earth, wind ether, water and light remain fixed in their own
nature, resorting to their eternal path."

"Therefore, I am fathomless and my nature is that it is impossible of being swum
across. It becomes unnatural if I am shallow. I am telling you the following device to cross
me."

"O, prince! Neither from desire nor ambition nor fear nor from affection, I am able
to solidify my waters inhabited by alligators."

"O, Rama! I shall make it possible to see that you are able to cross over. I will
arrange a place for the monkeys to cross me and bear with it. As far as the army crosses me, the
crocodiles will not be aggressive to them."

Then, Rama spoke to that ocean as follows: "Listen to me. This great arrow should
not go in vain. In which region should it be descended?"

Hearing Rama's words and seeing that powerful arrow, the large splendid Ocean spoke
the following words to Rama:

"Towards my northern side, there is a holy place. It is well known as Drumatulya, in
the same way as you are well known to this world."

"Numerous robbers of fearful aspect and deeds, having the sinful Abhiras as their
chief, drink my waters there."

"I am not able to bear that touch of those wicked people, the evil doers, O, Rama!
Let this excellent arrow with out vain be released over them there."

Hearing those words of the high-soled Ocean, Rama released that excellent and
splendid arrow towards that place as directed by the ocean.

The place where the arrow, whose splendor was akin to that of a thunder and a
thunder bolt, was descended by Rama- that place is indeed famous as desert of Maru* on this
earth.

The earth there, pierced by the dart, then emitted a sound . The waters of the
penultimate subterranean region gushed forth from the mouth of that cleft.

Then the hollow became known as Vrana. Water constantly seen, gushing forth from it
resembled seawater.

A terrific splitting sound was born in that place. Water was dried up in those
cavities, as a result of hurling of that arrow by Rama.

That desert of Maru became famous in the three worlds. Rama (the son of Dasaratha),
a wise man and a valiant man resembling a celestial, made that cavity dried up and gave a boon to
that desert of Maru.

Due to granting of a boon by Rama, that desert of Maru became the most congenial
place for cattle rearing, a place with a little of disease, producing tasty fruits and roots, with
a lot of clarified butter, a lot of milk and various kinds of sweet- smelling herbs. Thus it became
an auspicious and suitable move, bestowing these merits.

While that cavity was burning, Ocean the lord of rivers spoke these words to Rama
who knew all scientific treatises.

"O, excellent man! This one, named Nala, a glorious person, is the son of
Vishvakarma; who was given a boon by his father and is equal to Visvakarma."

"Let this greatly energetic monkey build a bridge across me. I can hold that bridge.
He is just the same as his father."

Thus speaking, the god of Ocean disappeared from that place. Then Nala, the more
distinguished among monkeys stood up and spoke the following words to Rama of great power:

"The great Ocean disclosed a truth. I will construct a bridge across this large
Ocean, taking recourse to the skill and ability of my father."

"This Sagara, the formidable mass of water, in fear of punishment, gave a passage to
Rama, wishing to see a bridge constructed on it."

"On the mountain of Mandara, the following boon was given by Visvakarma to my
mother: "O, god like lady! A son equal to me will be born to you."

"I am a son born of Visvakarma's own loins. I am equal to Visvakarma. This god of
Ocean has reminded me. The great ocean spoke the truth. Being unasked, I have not told you my
details earlier."

"I am capable of constructing a bridge across the ocean. Hence, let the foremost of
monkeys build the bridge now itself."

Then, being sent by Rama, hundreds and thousands of monkey heroes jumped in joy on
all sides towards the great forest.

Those army-chiefs of monkeys, who resembled mountains, broke the rocks and trees
there and dragged them away towards the sea.

Those monkeys filled the ocean with all types of trees like Sala and Asvakarna,
Dhava and bamboo, Kutaja, Arjuna, palmyra,Tilaka, Tinisa, Bilva, Saptaparna, Karnika, in blossom as
also mango and Asoka.

The excellent monkeys, the forest animals lifted and brought, like Indra's flag
posts, some trees with roots intact and some others without roots.

From here and there the monkeys brought Palmyra trees, pomegranate shrubs, coconut
and Vibhitaka, Karira, Bakula and neem trees.

The huge bodied monkeys with mighty strength uprooted elephant-sized rocks and
mountains and transported them by mechanical contrivances.

The water, raised up due to sudden throwing of mountains in the sea, soured upward
towards the sky and from there again, gushed back.

The rocks befalling on all sides perturbed the ocean. Some others drew up strings a
hundred Yojanas long (in order to keep the rocks in a straight line.)

Nala on his part initiated a monumental bridge in the middle of the ocean. The
bridge was built at that time with the cooperation of other monkeys, of terrible doings.

Some monkeys were holding poles for measuring the bridge and some others collected
the material. Reeds and logs resembling clouds and mountains, brought by hundreds of monkeys, lead
by the command of Rama, fastened some parts of the bridge.

Monkeys constructed the bridge with trees having blossom at the end of their boughs.
Some monkeys looking like demons seized rocks resembling mountains and peaks of mountains and
appeared running hither and thither.

Then, a tumultuous sound occurred when the rocks were thrown into the sea and when
mountains were caused to fall there.

On the first day, fourteen Yojanas of bridge were constructed by the monkeys
speedily, thrilled with delight as they were, resembling elephants.

In the same manner, on the second day twenty Yojanas of bridge were constructed
speedily by the monkeys of terrific bodies and of mighty strength.

Thus, on the third day twenty-one Yojanas of the bridge were constructed in the
ocean speedily by the monkeys with their colossal bodies.

On the forth day, a further of twenty-two Yojanas were constructed by the dashing
monkeys with a great speed.

In that manner, on the fifth day, the monkeys working quickly constructed
twenty-three yojanas of the bridge up to the other seashore.

That Nala, the strong and illustrious son of Visvakarma and an excellent monkey
built the bridge across the sea as truly as his father would have built it.

That beautiful and lovely bridge constructed by Nala across the ocean the abode of
alligators, shone brightly like a milky way of stars in the sky.

With a desire to behold that marvel, celestials along with Gandharvas, the heavenly
musicians, Siddhas (semi-divine beings of great purity and perfection, possessing super natural
qualities) and great sages came then and stood up in the sky.

The celestials and Gandharvas, the heavenly musicians saw Nala's bridge, having a
width of ten yojanas and a length of hundred yojanas and which was very difficult to be built.

The monkeys taking long leaps and short leaps shouted in joy. All other beings saw
that construction of the bridge across the ocean as unimaginable, impossible and wonderful, causing
their hair to stand on end in amazement.

Those thousand crores of monkeys in a great spectacle reached the other shore of the
great ocean soon after building that bridge across the sea.

That colossal bridge, which was broad, well-constructed, glorious, well postured and
held together firmly, looked beautiful like a separating straight line in the ocean.

Vibhishana, wielding a mace in his hand, stood up on the seashore along with his
ministers, for the purpose of invading the enemies.

Thereafter, Sugriva on his part spoke to Rama, the truly brave man as follows: "O,
valiant man! This ocean, the abode of alligators, is indeed vast. You ascend the shoulder of
Hanuman and let Lakshmana ascend the shoulder of Angada. These monkeys can hold both of you while
flying in the sky."

Rama the glorious and righteous man, wielding a bow along with Lakshmana together
with Sugriva, went in front of that army.

Some monkeys went along the middle of the bridge. Some others went along the sides.
Some others were jumping into water. Some others marched forward on the path. Some monkeys entered
the sky and aviated like Garuda the eagle.

The highly terrific sound of the ocean was covered up by the great sounds of the
terrific monkeys who were crossing the sea.

That army of monkeys, which crossed the ocean by the bridge constructed by Nala, was
encamped by Sugriva at a shore having many fruits tubers and water.

Seeing that Rama's accomplishment, which was amazing and arduous; celestials,
Siddhas (semi-divine beings possessing supernatural faculties) and Charanas (celestial bards) along
with great sages, forthwith approached Rama and consecrated him with very splendid waters
separately.

The celestials, Siddhas and others exalted Rama, who was duly respected by kings
with their auspicious -words as follows: " O, king! Defeat the enemies. Rule the earth and ocean
eternally for years."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing of Indrajit's killing and having ascertained the news, Ravana's counsellors
reported the matter hurriedly to Ravana.

"O monarch! Your great majestic son has been killed by Lakshmana with the help of
Vibhishana, while we were witnessing the event in the battle-field."

"Your valiant son, who was unbeatable in combats and that hero who conquered Indra
the lord of celestials, having collided with valiant Lakshmana, has been killed. Having tormented
Lakshmana with his arrows, Indrajit departed to the highest world."

Hearing that news of formidable, harsh and terrific death of Indrajit his son in
battle, Ravana gave way to a protracted swoon.

Regaining his consciousness after a long time, the king Ravana, confounded as he was
with sorrow on account of his son's death and with his mind confused, lamented as follows depressed
as he was.

"Alas! My child, the chief of the army of demons, having extraordinary might! Having
conquered Indra, how have you been subjected to the power of Lakshmana now?"

"Certainly, when enraged, you would pierce with your arrows in battle, even the
all-destroying time in the form of Yama the Lord of Death and even the peaks of Mount Mandara. What
to tell about Lakshmana?"

"O the long armed one! Highly esteemed to me is the king Yama, son of sun-god, by
whom you have been subjected to the ravages of time today."

"This is the path for great warriors even among all the celestial hosts. That male
offspring who is killed for the cause of his lord, obtains heaven."

"Seeing Indrajit having been killed, all the hosts of celestials, the guardians of
the world and the great sages now can sleep comfortably and peacefully."

"Bereft of Indrajit alone, the entire earth with its forest appear to be wholly
alone to me. Nay, even the three worlds!"

"Now, I shall hear the hue and cry of the demon-maidens in the gynaecium, even as
one would hear the roar of a troop of female-elephants in a mountain cave."

"O destroyer of enemies! Where did you go leaving the rank of Prince Regent as also
Lanka, the demons, your mother and myself, your wives and all of us."

"O hero! The obsequies rights in my honour ought to have been done by you,
consequent upon my death in future. You are, however, following a reverse path."

"Deserting us without taking away my tormentation, while Sugreeva, lakshmana and
Rama are still alive, where have you gone?"

A huge rage enveloped Ravana, the king of demons, born of his son's death, while he
was feeling distressed through grief as aforesaid.

The anguishes occasioned by the death of his son, flared up further for him, who by
his very nature, was wrathful, as rays of the sun flare up the blazing sun in summer.

With his eye brows joined together on his forehead, he shone brightly like an ocean,
at the time of the dissolution of the world, with crocodiles and giant waves.

While he was yawning with anger; a fire with smoke, as though clearly burning, broke
out from his mouth, as it did from the month of Vritra (in the former days).

Afflicted with the grief of his son's killing, that valiant Ravana got wrapped up in
wrath and pondering with his mind, craved for the killing of Seetha.

The dreadful eyes of that Ravana, which were red in colour by their very nature and
were red even by the fire of his wrath, looked glittering.

That naturally terrific form of Ravana, filled with the fire of his wrath, became
difficult to be approached, like the form of enraged Rudra the god of destruction.

Drops of tears fell down from his enraged eyes, as drops of oil with flames fall
down from blazing lamps.

The sound of his teeth, produced from the friction of his teeth as he ground them,
were heard like the noise of a large machine being bragged by the demons.

Trembling with fear, the demons hid themselves, in whichever quarter to which he
directed his look, enraged as he was, like the fire of universal dissolution.

Demons could not go towards Ravana, who was looking at all the four quarters, like
the enraged Yama the god of Death, who wants to devour both the mobile and the immobile
creatures.

Desirous of posting the demons to the battle-field, Ravana the king of demons, who
was very much enraged, then spoke as follows, in their midst:

"Brahma the lord of creation was gratified by me, by performing a stupendous
austerity for thousands of years, at the conclusion of those austerities."

"As a consequence of that austerity alone and by the grace of Brahma the lord of
creation, there was never a fear for me either from the demons or from the celestials."

"In the course of combats with the gods and demons, the armour gifted to me by
Brahma, the lord of creation, which is as brilliant as the sun, could not be mutilated by those who
held the thunderbolt in their fists."

"Who will, be it Indra himself, dare to attack me on the battle-field now, when
mounted on chariot on this field of battle, and duly wearing the aforesaid armour?"

"Let that large bow of mine, which was given at that time to me along with arrows by
the gracious Brahma the lord of creation, on the occasion of my combat between gods and demons, be
taken out today to the accompaniment of a band of musical instruments, for the purpose of killing
Rama and Lakshmana in the great battle."

That cruel Ravana, afflicted as he was with grief at the killing of his son, was
subjected to anger and deeply pondering with his mind, decided kill Seetha.

Looking fixedly with blood-red eyes on all those demons, who were making miserable
sounds, that very awful Ravana for his part, who had assumed a terrible appearance, though feeling
distressed, spoke to them as follows:

"In order to hoodwink the monkeys, something which had been killed there, was shown,
by taking recourse to conjuring tricks, as Seetha, by my child (Indrajit)"

"I shall make that hoax into a hard reality, which is pleasing to me. I shall
destroy Seetha, who is devoted to Rama, a bad warrior". Thus speaking to his counsellors, he
swiftly drew his sword.

The enraged Ravana, who was very much agitated in mind because of the grief for his
son's death, springing up suddenly and taking his excellent sword, having the dazzle of a clear
sky, sallied forth from the assembly hall along with his ministers swiftly and quickly to the place
where Seetha was.

Seeing Ravana going, his followers emitted a lion's roar. Seeing the enraged Ravana
and embracing each other, they spoke as follows:

"Both those brothers (Rama and Lakshmana), on seeing him now in fury, will get
perturbed. Indeed even the four guardians of the world had been frightened by him, who was in fury.
Many other enemies were also frightened by him in various battles."

"Fetching precious things existing in all the three worlds, Ravana enjoys them. No
one on the earth is equal to him in strength and prowess."

While those demons were thus talking, Ravana who was excited with fury, rushed
towards Seetha, who was present in the Ashoka grove.

Though being kept back by his companions whose minds were set on his welfare, Ravana
who was very much enraged, rushed like Mars, in the sky, which would rush towards the
constellation, Rohini in fury.

The faultless Seetha for her part, who was being guarded by female demons, saw the
enraged Ravana who was bearing an excellent sword.

Seetha was perturbed in seeing him, bearing sword and who was not going back
eventhough being kept back in many ways by his friends.

Filled with sorrow and lamenting, Seetha said to herself as follows: "From the
manner in which this fellow himself is rushing towards me in fury, I fear the evil-minded demon is
going to kill me, to make me husband-less, even though I have a husband".

"He incited me several times, devoted as I am to my husband, saying 'Be my
consort!'. He was refused firmly by me. Having been evidently afflicted with despair on my refusing
to wait upon him, he is surely intent to kill me, filled as he was with anger and infatuation."

"Otherwise, that vulgar demon might have killed those brothers, Rama and Lakshmana,
the foremost of men, today in battle, because of me."

"Here, I just heard a terrific great noise of a multitude of demons, who have been
jubilant and roaring about a pleasant happening."

"Alas! Woe is me, if that destruction of the two princes was brought about because
of me. Otherwise, the terrific demon of a sinful resolve, having not been able to kill Rama and
Lakshmana, is going to kill, me, because of the grief over his son's death."

"Those words of Hanuma were not acted upon by me, having a low mind. If I left on
that day on his back, though not won back by my husband, I would not have grieved like this today,
as I should be resting on the lap of my husband (in that case)."

"I think that the heart of that Kausalya will get burst, when the lady, who had only
one son, hears of her son having been killed in battle."

"While lamenting, Kausalya will vividly recall about the birth, childhood, youth,
the righteous acts and the handsome form of the great-souled Rama."

"Having observed a ceremony in honour of her deceased son and getting despondent and
unconscious, Kausalya will surely enter the flame or be drowned in water."

"Woe be to the unfaithful hunch-back Manthara, of sinful resolve, on whose
consequence, Kausalya will get this grief."

Seeing Seetha miserably weeping in that manner like Rohini (the deity presiding over
a constellation of this name), fallen under the sway of the planet Mars, when away of the moon-god
(her husband), a minister called Suparshva, a good-natured, upright and highly intelligent demon,
even though restrained by other ministers, spoke the following words Ravana, the foremost of
demons:

"O Ravana, the younger brother of Kubera himself! How do you wish to kill Seetha,
abandoning your righteousness, in a bout of anger?"

"O valiant king of demons! Why are you thinking of destroying a lady, ever since you
completed the vow of celibacy essential for a study of the Vedic lore and were devoted to your own
duty?"

"O king! Behold at Seetha, endowed, as she is, with beauty. Together with us,
release your anger, in battle, on Rama alone."

"Making yourself ready today itself, the fourteenth day of the dark half of this
month, you along with the armies, sally forth tomorrow, the moonless day, to victory."

"As a valiant and shrewd chariot-warrior, fighting with a sword, in the foremost of
your chariots, you can fetch Seetha by killing Rama, the son of Dasaratha."

Accepting that advice, endowed with justice, tendered by a friend, the evil-minded
Ravana went to his palace. Thereafter, that valiant Ravana, along with his friends, again went to
his assembly hall from there.
undefined
undefined
undefined

"Hearing the news of a great happiness from Hanuma, Bharata the truly brave ruler
and the destroyer of enemies, commanded (as follows) to Shatrughna, who too felt delighted at the
news."

"Let men of good conduct, offer worship to their family-deities, sanctuaries in the
city with sweet-smelling flowers and to the accompaniment of musical instruments."

"Let bards well-versed in singing praises and Puranas (containing ancient legends,
cosmogony etc.) as also all panegyrists, all those proficient in the use of musical instruments,
courtesans all collected together, the queen-mothers, ministers, army-men and their wives,
brahmanas accompanied by Kshatriyas (members of fighting class), leaders of guilds of traders and
artisans, as also their members, come out to see the moon-like countenance of Rama."

Hearing the words of Bharata, Shatrughna the destroyer of valiant adversaries called
together, laborers working on wages, numbering many thousands and dividing them into gangs, ordered
them (as follows):

"Let the cavities on the path from Nandigrama to Ayodhya be levelled. Let the rough
and the even places be made flat."

"Let the entire ground be sprinkled with ice-gold water. Let some others strew it
all over with parched grains and flowers."

"Let the streets in Ayodhya, the excellent City, be lined with flags. Let the
dwellings (on the road-side) be decorated, till the time of rising of the sun."

"Let hundreds of men sprinkle, on the main royal highway, with five fragrant colours
and with rows of garlands as well as lose flowers."

On hearing that command of Shatrughna, Dhrushti, Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha,
Arthasadhaka, Ashoka, Mantrapala and Sumantra proceeded with joy.

Some rode on thousands of well-adorned elephants in rut and bearing banners. Some
others rode on female-elephants provided with golden girths, along with those elephants. Excellent
chariot-warriors issued forth in their chariots, with speed.

Warriors on selected horses even still superior ones in thousands, bearing banners
and pennants, carrying javelins, spears and nooses, as also surrounded by thousands of
foot-soldiers, sallied forth.

Then, all the wives of the deceased Dasaratha, placing Kausalya and Sumitra in front
of them, mounting their vehicles, issued forth. All of them, including Kaikeyi, reached
Nandigrama.

Placing the wooden sandals of his brother (Rama) on his head and taking the white
parasol (intended for Rama) which was adorned with white garlands and two white whisks decorated
with gold, eminently worthy of kings, accompanied by the foremost of Brahmanas, leaders of the
guilds of traders and artisans, including the mercantile class, surrounded by the counselors with
garlands and bell-shaped sweets in their hands, cheered by the blass of conches and kettle-drums,
duly praised by panegyrists, the great-souled Bharata, for his part, whose mind was set on
righteousness, who was well-versed with the secret of virtue, who was emaciated through fasting,
who felt miserable, was clad in the bark of trees and the sking of a black antelope, who
experienced joy for the first time in hearing the news of the arrival of his brother then went in
advance, along with his ministers, to meet Rama."

The earth seemed, as it were, shaking with the sound of horse-hoofs the rattling of
rims of chariot-wheels and by the tumults of couches and kettle-drums.

The entire City of Ayodhya literally reached Nandigrama. Glancing round, Bharata
spoke as follows to Hanuma.

"Indeed, I hope the fickle-mindedness which constitutes the peculiarity of monkeys,
has not been resorted to by you. For I do not indeed see Rama, a worthy scion of Kakutthsa and the
destroyer of adversaries."

When these remarks were uttered by Bharata, Hanuma forthwith replied, as follows to
Bharata of unfailing prowess, by his meaningful words which were, as if they were apprising the
situation.

"A formidable roar of rejoiced monkeys is being heard, for, they are seeing on the
way, trees which continually, yield fruit, adorned with blossom, flowing with honey which is drunk
by bees, making reverberant humming sounds - all due to the grace of Sage Bharadwaja O Bharata, the
destroyer of adversaries! A boon was conferred by Indra, the lord of celestials, by virtue of which
a hospitality rich with all excellences was earlier extended by Bharadwaja to you, with your entire
army. I presume that the aforesaid army of monkeys is crossing the rivers, Gomati."

"See the cloud of dust, shooting froths towards the grove of Sala trees. I presume
that the monkeys are shaking the beautiful grove of Sala trees."

"There is seen, in distance, that very famous aerial car, shining brightly like the
moon. The wonderful aerial car called Pushpaka was built with his intelligence by Viswakarma (an
architect of gods, who has been referred to here as Brahma by virtue of his creative talent.)."

"This wonderful aerial car, with a speed of thought, which is carrying the great
souled Rama, and shines brightly like the rising sun, belongs to Kubera, the lord of riches, by the
grace of brahma, the lord of creation. (Who bestowed it on him)"

"In the same aerial car are the valiant Rama and Lakshmana, the brothers, along with
Seetha, the immensely brilliant Sugreeva and Vibhishana the demon."

Meanwhile, the words 'Here comes Rama' were loudly said and a clamour born of joy
from the mouth of women, children, youth and elders touched the sky.

Descending from their chariots, elephants as also horses and standing on the ground,
all those people saw, like the moon in the sky, that Rama seated in the aerial car.

The over-joyed Bharata with his joined palms, his face turned towards Rama,
worshipped and welcomed him in a befitting way.

Rama, with his long and large eyes, seated in the aerial car, created by Viswakarma
the divine architect with his intelligence, shone like another Indra who carries the thunderbolt in
his hand.

Bent low in reverence, Bharata then saluted Rama, who stood in the forepart of the
aerial car and shining like the sun appearing on Mount Meru.

As authorized by Rama, that excellent aerial car, having a great speed and endowed
with the images of swans, landed on the ground.

Feeling glad, when lifted on that aerial car and approaching Rama, Bharata of true
valour, greeted him yet again.

Fully rising from his seat and placing that Bharata, who was seen after a long time,
on his lap, Rama delightfully embraced him.

Thereafter, the jubilant Bharata, the destroyer of adversaries, approaching
Lakshmana and Seetha, then saluted them in reverence and also announced his name.

Then, Bharata embraced Sugreeva, Jambavan, Angada, Mainda, Dvivida, Neela and
Rishabha.

He also embraced Sushena, Nala, Gavaksha, Gandhamadana, Sharabha, Panasa and the
surrounding monkeys.

Then, those monkeys, who can change their form at will, assumed the form of humans
and rejoicingly asked about the welfare of Bharata.

Thereupon, the immensely brilliant Bharata, the son of Dasaratha and the foremost
among the virtuous, after embracing Sugreeva the excellent monkey, spoke to him (as follows):

"You are a fifth brother, for all the four of us, O Sugreeva! A friend is born of
affection, while malifience is the attribute of an adversary."

Thereafter, Bharata spoke the following kind words to Vibhishan: "Thank heaven! A
very difficult task was accomplished by you, as a companion of Rama."

Then, the valiant Shatrughna offered his salutation to Rama, along with Lakshmana
and offered his reverential salutation to Seetha's feet, by bowing in humility.

By going to his mother, who became pale and emaciated due to her grief, Rama, by
bowing, seized her feet in salutation, making his mother's heart delighted.

Offering salutation to Sumatra, the illustrious Kaikeyi and all his mothers, Rama
then went to Vasishta the priest and offered his salutation in reverence.

With joined palms, all the citizens of Ayodhya said to Rama: "Welcome to you, O the
great-armed! O the enhancer of Kausala's delight!"

Rama saw those thousands of joined palms held by the citizens, appearing as
lotus-flowers in bloom.

Taking those wooden sandals of Rama, Bharata, the knower of virtue, personally
placed them below the feet of Rama, the lord of men.

Having offered his salutation with joined palms, Bharata spoke to Rama as follows:
"This entire sovereignty of yours, kept with me as a deposit, is being returned to you, by me."

"My life has accomplished its purpose today and my wish too stands fulfilled, in
that I see you, its king, come back to Ayodhya."

"You review your treasury, granary, palace of your spirit, everything has been
enhanced tenfold by me."

Seeing that Bharata, speaking thus with affection with his brother, Vibhishana the
demon and the monkeys shed their tears.

Placing Bharata on his lap with delight, Rama thereupon flew with his army (of
monkeys and bears) in that aerial car to the hermitage of Bharata.

Reaching the hermitage of Bharata along with his army Rama then descended from the
anterior of the aerial car and stood, for the time-being, on the ground.

Then, Rama, for his part, spoke to that excellent aerial car, "Serve as a transport
to Kubera, the lord. I permit you to leave."

Thus permitted by Rama, that excellent aerial car, thereupon proceeded towards the
northern direction, so as t reach the abode of Kubera the lord of riches.

That wonderful aerial car, Pushpaka which was seized by Ravana once, went in speed
to Kubera, as impelled by Rama's advice.

Affectionately pressing the feet of Vasishta, his well-wisher and family-priest,
even as Indra the lord of celestials would press the feet of Brihaspati (the preceptor of gods),
the valiant Rama sat by his side, on a separate seat.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Having spoken the aforesaid harsh words to Ravana, Vibhishana arrived almost
immediately to the place where Rama was together with Lakshmana.

Those leaders of monkeys standing on the ground saw Vibhishana, resembling the peak
of Mount Meru and shining like a thunderbolt in the sky.

His four companions of terrific prowess were also there with him. They were wearing
weapons and armour and were adorned with excellent ornaments.

Vibhishana also resembled a mass of cloud, the equal of the God who wields the
thunderbolt. He was holding excellent weapons and was adorned with wonderful jewels.

Sugriva the valiant of monkeys, who was difficult to be overpowered, having seen
Vibhishana, the fifth one along with four others, became thoughtful along with monkeys.

Having thought for a moment, Sugriva spoke these sterling words to all those monkeys
and to Hanuman in particular.

"See this demon possessing all types of weapons, coming along with four demons.
There is no doubt that he is coming to kill us."

Hearing Sugriva's words, all those excellent monkeys lifted trees and mountains and
spoke as follows:

"Do you swiftly order us to slay these wicked doers, O, king? Let us strike these
fools down so that they drop to the ground!"

While the monkeys were speaking thus among one another, Vibhishana had reached the
northern shore and indeed coolly halted there.

That great and highly intelligent Vibhishana, halting in the sky itself, saw Sugriva
and those monkeys and spoke to them in a loud voice (as follows):

"There is a demon called Ravana, the king of demons, having a bad conduct. I am his
younger brother, known as Vibhishana."

"It is Ravana who, having killed a bird Jatayu, took away Sita from Janasthana.That
unfortunate lady is held captive against her will and she is now amidst the female titans who guard
her jealously"

"I persuaded Ravana again and again by my diverse words and arguments to restore
Sita smoothly to Rama.

"That Ravana, impelled by fate, did not receive my sage advice, as a perverted
person does not accept his prescribed medicine"

"Reviled by him and humiliated as a slave, I, leaving my sons and my wife, have come
to take refuge with Rama."

"Inform immediately to high soled Rama, the protector of all the worlds, that I,
Vibhishana, have come here."

The swift-paced Sugriva, having heard the words of Vibhishana, spoke more hurriedly
to Rama, in front of Lakshmana as follows:

"Belonging to the enemy force, here is an adversary taking us unawares, who
unexpectedly has come here to slay us at the first opportunity like an owl destroying crows!"

"O, annihilator of enemies! You ought to be aware of the design, distribution,
leading of the army and the secret service of the monkeys and also of your foes. May good come to
you!"

"These demons can assume any form at will and can disappear. They are valiant and
deceitful. We can not trust them at any time."

"He may be a spy of Ravana the king of demons. He will succeed to become a member
among us and create differences. There is no doubt."

"Otherwise he , intelligent by himself, can get into possession of a weak point in
us. Having first gained our confidence by craft, he may even at any time attack us."

"A contingent supplied by friends or an inhabitant of the woods (like our selves),
or furnished by hereditary warriors or paid servants - all these contingents can be accepted but
not that furnished by an enemy."

"O, Lord! He is indeed a demon by nature and a brother of an enemy who came directly
from an adversary. How can we keep trust in him?"

The younger brother of the famous Ravana, called Vibhishana along with four other
demons approached you for refuge."

"O, the excellent one among men knowing what is right! Know that Ravana is sending
Vibhishana. I opine that Vibhishana is fit for arrest."

"O, the faultless one! Being sent with a crooked intent, this demon came here to
attack when you are going to repose faith in him, (remaining hidden by his witchcraft).

"This Vibhishana is indeed the brother of cruel Ravana. Hence, let him along with
his ministers be killed, by imposing severe punishment on them."

The chief of army Sugriva, who knew how to speak expressed thus hurriedly to Rama,
who was skilled in oratory and thereafter entered into silence.

Hearing those words of Sugriva, the exceedingly strong Rama addressed as follows to
the monkeys in front of Hanuman staying near by:

"The very reasonable words uttered by Sugriva about Vibhishana were heard by you
too."

"An efficient and intelligent person ever desirous of everlasting well being of his
friends should properly advise them well in difficult matters. Hence, tell your opinion one by
one"

Thus asked by Rama, those monkeys free from lassitude, wishing to do good and out of
their politeness, spoke their respective opinions to Rama as follows:

"O, Rama! Nothing is unknown to you in the three worlds. You are consulting us with
a friendly heart, as an honor to us."

"You are avowed to truth, a valiant man and a righteous man of firm fortitude. You
take action only after proper investigation. You have good memory. You are committed in your heart
to your friends."

"Hence, your counselors, who are rich in their minds and are moreover efficient, one
by one, will tell their opinion with reason."

Having spoken thus by the monkeys, Angada the intelligent monkey told Rama to
arrange for examination of Vibhishana before hand."

"Vibhishana who came from an enemy is indeed to be doubted by all means. He is not
to be made as a trust worthy person so soon."

"Deceitful persons move around, concealing their peculiar nature and attack at weak
places. They will create a very great misfortune."

"One must take a decision, after ascertaining the pros and cons of it. One should
take up the action, if there is an advantage and reject it, if it is faulty."

"O, king! If there are great faults in him, let him be rejected undoubtedly. If we
recognize many good qualities in him, let him be accepted."

Thereafter Sharabha on his part spoke the following meaningful and decisive words:
"O, tiger among men! Let a spy be sent to shadow him"

"By sending out a spy and causing a suitable investigation by a keenly intellectual
spy, he can then be accepted as per justice."

Then, the discerning Jambavan on his part, perceiving the matter through his
learning derived from scriptures, advised the following fault-less and qualitative words:

"This Vibhishana came from sinful Ravana who has contracted hostility with you and
that too at a wrong place and time. He is to be suspected by all means."

Then Mainda, skilled in discriminating good and bad conduct in others observed the
matter carefully and spoke in his perfect oratory in the following highly reasonable words:

"O, king of kings! This Vibhishana is indeed the younger brother of that Ravana. Let
him be questioned slowly by sweet words"

"O, the best among men! Having read actually his mind whether he is dangerous or
not, you should act according to your feelings."

Then the well educated Hanuman, the excellent among counselors; spoke the following
smooth meaningful, sweet and brief words:

"Even Brihaspati, while talking cannot excel you, who are possessing an exalted
intellect. You are powerful and the foremost man among those who are eloquent."

"O, king! O, Rama! I am talking neither for argument, nor for competition (with
other counselors, nor for superiority, nor out of passion for debate but on account of importance
of this matter in hand."

"I am perceiving an error in what was advised by your counselors assigned to look
into advantages and disadvantages, accruing from accepting Vibhishana. It is not possible for such
a judicious investigation into his character."

"Without entrusting any work, it is not possible to understand his ability. But at
the same time, it occurs to me as a mistake to entrust any work so soon to a stranger."

"What ever was told by your counselors that it was befitting to send spies to
Vibhishana, that action is not possible due to impracticality of the proposition."

"It has been said that Vibhishana came into a wrong place and time. In that matter,
I have to express my thought. Listen to it."

"This place and time become rightly obtained in his mind , as he has thought that
you are superior to Ravana and also found merits in you and demerits in Ravana."

"It is indeed appropriate for him to arrive at this place and time, by seeing the
prowess in you and the wickedness in Ravana. It is worthy of his judgment."

"O, king! Whatever was told by your counselors that let Vibhishana be questioned by
spies of unknown identity, my considered view is as follows:

"A wise man being questioned suddenly would be apprehensive of that questioning. In
those circumstances, an easily obtained friend becomes faithless upon facing a deceitful
questioning."

"O, king! Without possessing a high skill of reading his diversified tones, it is
not possible rapidly to comprehend his intention."

"I am not seeing any bad intention at all in his talk. His face is also bright.
Hence, I do not doubt him."

"A deceitful person does not approach so fearlessly and confidently. His expression
too is not bad. Hence, there is no doubt to me on him."

"It is not possible to hide expression of the face, even if it is concealed. By
force, the internal intent of the persons certainly gets revealed."

"O, the eminently skillful man in work! An action endowed with proper place and time
transacts successfully, if it is performed quickly."

"Seeing your perseverance and the improper conduct of Ravana as well as hearing
about Vali having been killed and Sugriva anointed as king, he deliberately came here, with a
desire to obtain the kingdom of demons. On consideration of this aspect alone, he is worthy of
acceptance by us."

"O, Rama the best among the wise! It has been told by me this according to my
ability about the sincerity of this demon. After hearing my words, you are indeed the final judge
of the issue."
undefined
undefined
undefined

When that missile was made defunct, Ravana the king of demons, for his part, doubled
his fury and in his anger, began to employ another missile immediately.

Ravana, who was endowed with extraordinary splendour, started to release another
cruel and terrific missile built by Maya the demon, on Rama.

Then, from that bow, came forth, blazing pikes, maces and clubs, which were hard as
adamant, on all sides.

Various kinds of furious mallets, deceptive nooses and blazing thunderbolts came
forth, like piercing gales at the time of the destruction of the world.

The glorious Rama, the foremost among the knower in the use of excellent missiles
and who was endowed with extra ordinary splendour, struck down that missile with an excellent
missile presided over by Gandharvas the celestial musicians.

When that missile was made defunct by the great souled Rama, Ravana with his coppery
eyes in anger, employed a missile presided over by the sun-god.

Then came forth resplendent and large discuses, from the bow of that intelligent
Ravana, of terrific impetuosity.

Even as they came forth and falling on all sides, the sky was blazing and the
quarters illuminated, as by the moon, the sun and other planets.

In the forefront of Ravana's army, that Rama split those discuses and other strange
weapons, with a multitude of arrows.

Seeing that missile struck down, Ravana the king of demons, for his part, pierced
Rama with ten arrows in all his vital parts.

Eventhough that Ravana struck Rama with those ten arrows released from his great
bow, Rama of extraordinary energy was not shaken.

Then, Rama the victorious in battle, was quite enraged and struck Ravana in all his
organs with a multitude of arrows.

In the meantime, the mighty and enraged Lakshmana, Rama's younger brother, the
destroyer of valiant enemies, seized hold of seven arrows.

Lakshmana of great brilliance, with those arrows of high velocity, tore off into
many pieces, the flag-staff of Ravana, which bore the emblem of a man's head.

The glorious and mighty Lakshmana, with a single arrow, tore the head of Ravana's
charioteer, which was adorned with blazing ear-rings.

With five sharp arrows, Lakshmana then chopped off Ravana's bow, which looked like
an elephant's trunk.

Bouncing forward, Vibhishana killed, with his mace, the excellent horses of Ravana,
which looked like black clouds and were tall as mountains.

Leaping down with speed from his large chariot, whose horses had been killed, Ravana
then exhibited a violent anger towards the younger brother of Rama.

Then, Ravana, of great energy and prowess, hurled a spear looking like a blazing
thunderbolt, on Vibhishana.

Even before the spear reached Vibhishana, Lakshmana tore it with three of his arrows
and a loud cheer then arose from the monkeys in the battle-field.

That gold-crowned spear, torn into three pieces, fell like a large meteor with
sparks of fire falling from the sky.

Thereupon, Ravana took hold of another large most competent spear, which was
difficult to be approached even by Yama the lord of Death and blazing as it was, with its own
splendour.

The mighty and the evil-minded Ravana swiftly hurled that very great spear, burning
with a radiance similar to that of a blazing thunder-bolt.

In the meanwhile, the valiant Lakshmana quickly rushed towards that Vibhishana, who
got a danger to his life.

To rescue that Vibhishana, the heroic Lakshmana, having stretched his bow, threw out
streams of arrows on Ravana who was holding a spear in his hand.

Poured in with a multitude of arrows discharged by the great-souled Lakshmana,
Ravana with his attach frustrated, did not make up his mind to attack Vibhishana further.

Seeing Vibhishana his brother rescued by Lakshmana, that Ravana, turning his face
towards Lakshmana spoke the following words:

"O Lakshmana, exalter of your own strength! As Vibhishana was rescued by you in this
way, this spear, on letting off Vibhishana the demon, is being hurled on you now."

"This spear, having blood-marks and hurled by bludgeon-like arm, having pierced your
heart, will depart only after taking your life."

Thus saying, the greatly enraged Ravana roared and hurled towards Lakshmana, that
unfailing spear, which was adorned with eight loudly clamouring bells, which had been designed by
Maya the demon by dint of his conjuring trick, capable of destroying adversaries and blazing as it
was with splendour.

That spear, with a sound equal to Indra's thunder-bolt, hurled by the terribly swift
Ravana, soon fell with speed on Lakshmana in the battle-front.

Rama repeatedly uttered to that spear even as it was rushing forth (on Lakshmana) as
follows: "May it be well with Lakshmana! May you prove useless! May your effort be frustrated!"

That spear, which was looking like a venomous serpent, released by the enraged
Ravana in the battle, quickly penetrated the bosom of Lakshmana, who stood fearless.

That spear, like the tongue of Vasuki (the lord of serpents), blazing with a great
dazzle, fell on the broad chest of Lakshmana, with enormous speed.

Penetrated very deeply and pierced through his heart by the spear due to the force
exerted by Ravana, Lakshmana fell to the ground.

Seeing Lakshmana in that state, Rama, of extraordinary splendour, who was stationed
in the vicinity, became sorrowful at heart because of the love towards his brother.

Rama, whose eyes were filled with tears, reflected just for a while and then was
very much enraged, like fire at the time of dissolution of the world.

Becoming aware that it was not the time for feeling despondent, and looking at
Lakshmana, Rama resumed that highly tumultuous battle with a great and whole-hearted endeavour,
determined as he was to destroy Ravana.

Then, Rama saw Lakshmana, who was struck by the spear in that Great War, bathed as
he was in blood and looking like a mountain with a snake (entering its centre).

Even with an exertion to pull out that spear hurled by the mighty Ravana, those
foremost of the monkeys could not those foremost of the monkeys could not do it because they were
being tormented by Ravana the foremost of demons with a stream of his arrows.

Penetrating through Lakshmana's bosom, that spear touched the earth. Seizing hold of
awful spear with his hands, the mighty Rama drew it out and getting enraged, broke it during the
course of the battle.

While Rama was drawing the spear out; arrow, which pierced his vital organs, were
sunk by the mighty Ravana on all his limbs.

Ignoring those arrows and having embraced Lakshmana, Rama spoke to Hanuma and
Sugreeva, the king of monkeys, as follows:

"O the chiefs of monkeys! Remain just encompassing Lakshmana. Let this malicious
Ravana of evil designs be killed. The time to manifest my prowess, which I have been wishing for
long, has come, as for a chataka bird, the site of a cloud would come, as sought by it, at the end
of a hot season."

"I take this vow in truth before you, at this moment, O monkeys, that without delay,
you will see the world devoid of Ravana or Rama (myself)."

"I encountered with the loss of sovereignity, the dwelling in the forest, the
wandering around in the woods of Dandaka and the rough treatment of Seetha by the demons."

"A great and terrible suffering has happened to me and an agony equivalent to hell.
Now, by killing Ravana in battle, I will relieve myself of all that agony."

"That sinful demon, for whose sake, this army of monkeys has been brought by me,
Sugreeva has been anointed on the throne after killing Vali and for whose sake the ocean has been
crossed and a bridge built on it, has come within the range of my sight in the battle-field
now."

"This Ravana, having come within the range of my vision, cannot survive, any more
than the one who has come within the range of vision of a snake injecting deadly poison with its
very glance or than a serpent who has come within the range of vision of Garuda, the king of birds
and the enemy of serpents."

"O the foremost of the monkeys who are so difficult to conquer! Seated on the
mountain-peaks, you witness at ease, this battle between myself and Ravana."

"Let the three worlds (viz. the earth, heaven and the intermediate region) including
Gandharvas the celestial musicians, the gods, the sages and the celestial bards see today the
Ramahood of Rama during the course of my battle."

"I shall perform today a feat, which people in the world including all living beings
both mobile and immobile, as also gods, will ever narrate together, describing how the battle
proceeded, as long as the earth is able to support those who occupy it."

Thus speaking, Rama with an attentive mind in the battle-field, struck Rama with
sharp arrows, decked in pure gold.

Thereupon, Ravana streamed forth blazing steel arrows and then clubs, as clouds
would stream forth the rains.

A tumultuous sound arose from the excellent arrows, released by Rama and Ravana, as
they struck each other.

The arrows of Rama and Ravana, split asunder and scattered off, with their blazing
points, fell from the space on to the surface of the earth.

The loud sound, produced by the impact of the bow-string on the palms of those two
heroes Rama and Ravana, which struck terror in all the living beings, was felt astonished by the
audience.

Torn asunder by the streams of a multitude of arrows by the great-souled Rama, who
was armed with a blazing bow, while coming in collusion with him, Ravana took to his heels out of
fear, like a cloud when pushed by a tempest.
undefined
undefined
undefined
Hearing the lamentation of Ravana, Kumbhakarna laughed at a full volume and spoke as 
follows:
"The same bad consequence, which was imagined by us earlier while taking the final decision 
after our consultation, is faced by you now, due to your utter disregard of the words spoken by your 
well-wishers."
"How a doer of wicked deeds indeed falls into damnation, so also a punishment for your 
sinful act has indeed reached your fast."
"O emperor! This course of action was not excepted by you at first. You did not conceive 
this consequence, only because of your sheer arrogance of power."
"He who, abiding in power, performs duties to be done earlier at a later stage and duties 
to be done later, at an early stage, does not know what is a right course and what is a wrong course."
"Action done perversely, regardless of space and time, get spoiled like offering oblations 
without properly making the fire well-prepared."
"He, who acts according to an agreement done with his counsellors, considering three 
types of duties*, by harassing five types of means**, moves along a right course."
"A king who wishes to execute am agreement as per law, understands it through his own 
intellect as well as the counsellors and discovers it through his friends, is on a right course."
"O king of demons! A man resorts to virtue or worldly gain or pleasure or all the three 
together or a twin combination of virtue and worldly gain or virtue and pleasure or worldly gain and 
pleasure or worldly gain and pleasure, according to an appointed time*."
"That sovereign king or crown prince, who, having heard which one is the best out of 
these three but does not keep it in mind, his extensive learning would be in vain."
"O the foremost of demons! Whosoever deliberates with his counsellors and resorts to 
an act of with his counsellors and resorts to an act of bestowing gifts or conciliation or sowing dissension 
at appropriate occasion or exhibits valour or resorts to them all together or takes recourse to both 
right action and the reverse of it at the right time or pursues virtue or worldly gain or pleasure at 
the appropriate time, that intelligent person never confronts a misfortune in this world."
"A sovereign has to do an act here, looking into his welfare as a consequence along with 
his counsellors who make their subsistence by their intelligence and who understand the true state of 
the things."
"Men with brutal ideas, who are initiated in discussions, aspire to tell haughty things, 
without fully knowing the precepts of the scriptures."
"The words spoken by those who did not know the scriptures, who do not recollect the 
books dealing with practical life and who covet for abundant wealth are not to be implemented."
"Those men who talk with audacity, some inimical things in a friendly way, are to be 
kept out of deliberations, as they certainly spoil the work to be done."
"Some counsellors, colluding with some learned adversaries, spoil their king and make 
them do wrong deeds."
"The king should make-out those ministers who have been transformed by the enemy to their 
side (through bribery and other things) and are enemies though looking like friends, through their conduct 
when a final decision is being taken after deliberation."
"Outsiders find out the fickleness of a ruler, who is led away by false appearances and 
quickly performs the acts, as birds discover the hole (made by the arrow of Skanda, the commander-in-chief 
of gods) in the Kruancha mountain."
"A king who disregards an enemy and does not protect himself, indeed faces disappointing 
occurrences and would be removed from his position."
"That advice which was tendered to you earlier by vibhishana is beneficial to us. Do 
whatever you wish to do."
On hearing those words of Kumbhakarna, Ravana, on his part, twisted his eye-brows in 
anger and spoke the following words:
"Why are you advising me like a venerable great teacher? What is the use in getting wearied 
of your speech? Let a work, most befitting of time, be performed."
"Now, it is a waste to tell again of that act which was wrongly done before, either by 
mistake or by an illusion of mind or by taking shelter in strength and prowess."
"Let whatever be appropriate at this moment be thought of now. Wise men do not repent 
over the past. Past is indeed but the past."
"If you have affection indeed for me or if you discover your own prowess and if you think 
it fit in your heart that my work is to be done very much, you nullify the hardship, born out of my 
wicked conduct, by your prowess."
"He who rescues an afflicted soul, whose fortune is ruined, he is the real friend. He 
who is ready at hand to help those who have deviated from the right course, is a kinsman."
Thereupon, hearing those deeply harsh words spoken by Ravana and understanding that he 
is quite enraged, Kumbhakarna spoke slowly and smoothly.
Observing that his brother is highly perturbed and excited of his senses, Kumbhakarna, 
while consoling him, gently spoke the following words:
"O king, the annihilator of adversaries! Listen to my words attentively. O emperor of 
demons! Enough of your giving way to the anguish. Abandoning your anger completely, you ought to be 
your normal self again."
"O king! Until I live, this idea should not be formed in your mind. I shall destroy him, 
for whose account, you are feeling anguished."
"O king! In whatever situation you are placed, I have to give certainly a good advice 
to you. I gave this advice, because of our relation and brotherly affection."
"See that which is to be done and this juncture, out of affection by a brother, viz. 
the destruction of adversaries in battle, will be done by me."
"See today, O mighty armed king, the fleeing army of monkeys and Rama along with his 
brother being killed by me in the fore-front of the battle-field."
"O the mighty armed! Be happy by seeing that Rama's head, which I shall bring today from 
the battle. Let Seetha be unhappy."
"Let all those demons in Lanka, whose relatives have died in battle, witness the death 
of the most beloved Rama today."
"Today, I shall do the act of wiping off tears of demons, who have been afflicted with 
grief and lamenting because of the destruction of their relatives in combat by the adversaries."
"See today in battle, the mountain-like Sugreeva, the king of monkeys, looking like a 
cloud illuminated by the sun, thrown about, dissipated."
"O faultless Ravana! Why are you agitated now, when you are being consoled by those demons 
and by me, who are desirous of killing Rama?"
"O king of demons! Rama will indeed kill you, only after killing me. On that account, 
I do not regret for myself."
"O Ravana, having unequal prowess and the annihilator of enemies! You can command me, 
even now, as you wish. No other person need be sought, for a dispatch to the battle."
"I can destroy your enemies, who have a great strength. I can engage in combat with all 
those persons, whether he is Indra or Yama or the fire-god to the wind-god or even Varuna."
"Indra also gets frightened of me, having a mountain-sized body wielding a sharpened 
pike, having pointed tusks and even as I roar."
"Even otherwise, no one can stand alive in front of me, who is even weaponless and smashing 
the enemies by me strength alone."
"Without using a javelin or a mace or a sword or sharp arrows, I myself, on getting excited, 
can kill even Indra, with my bare hands."
"If Rama today survives even after facing the rapid blows of my fists, then my flood 
of arrows will drink the blood of Rama."
"O king! When I exist, why do you suffer from anxiety? Here, I am ready to sally forth 
for the destruction of your enemies."
"Be free from the terrific fear of Rama. In the battle, I will kill Rama, Lakshmana, 
the mighty Sugreeva and even Hanuma, by whom the city of Lanka was burnt off and the demons were killed."
"I shall devour the monkeys in battle, which is near at hand. I wish to contribute a 
tremendous and extraordinary reputation for you."
'O king! If you have a fear for Indra or even for Brahma, I shall remove it then, as 
the sun removes darkness of the night. When I am enraged, even celestials will lay down on the floor."
"I shall extinguish even Yama the god of death. I shall devour the fire-god. I shall 
cause the sun along with the stars to fall asunder on the floor."
"I shall kill Indra. I shall drink away the ocean. I shall crush the mountains into a 
powder. I shall tear up the earth."
"Let all the living beings, being devoured from all sides see today the prowess of Kumbhakarna, 
who slept for a long time. The entire heaven is not enough for my food."
"I am going to bring you happiness, conferring you a delight by the destroyal of Rama. 
Having killed Rama along with Lakshmana, I shall devour all the chiefs of army of monkeys."
"O king! You make merry today and drink wine. Throw away your agony and perform your 
usual duties. While I send Rama to the world of Yama, the god of death, Seetha will be subservient to 
your after a log time."
undefined
undefined
undefined
Seetha saw the illusory head and bow. She heard Ravana narrating about Rama's friendly 
relationship with Sugreeva, as earlier apprised by Hanuman. Recognizing that head as that of Rama, with 
a proof resembling her husband's eyes, facial complexion, hair, expanse of his forehead and the beautiful 
jewel worn on the top of his head, she was very much afflicted with sorrow, cried like an osprey and 
abused Kaikeyi who was the originator of the present calamity (as follows):
Kaikeyi! Be a fulfiller of your craving! This Rama, causing a joy to the family, has 
been slain. The entire race has been destroyed by a woman of squabbling nature.
"You gave clothes made of bark to the venerable Rama and sent him on exile to the forest 
along with me. What harm has he done to you?"
Thus speaking, Seetha the miserable girl was trembling and fell on the ground like a 
plantain tree that was cut off. Thus speaking, Seetha the miserable girl was trembling and fell on the 
ground like a plantain tree that was cut off.
The wide eyed Seetha thereafter was consoled in a moment, regained consciousness, approached 
near that illusory head and lamented as follows:
"O, the long armed Rama! The pursuer of a strong will! Alas, you have been killed! I 
have become a witness to your last fate. I have been made a widow."
"It is said that the early death of a husband is the misfortune of a wife. You, having 
good conduct, have preceded me in death."
"Even you who were actually intent on protecting me, fallen in great affliction and immersed 
in an ocean of grief, have been killed by the enemies"
"O, Rama! My mother- in-law Kausalya who cherished you tenderly has been left without 
a son and resembles a cow that has lost its calf."
"O, Rama! It was mentioned even by astrologers that your life span is lengthy. O, Rama! 
Their words are wrong. You are short lived."
"Otherwise, your prudence might have disappeared even though you were sagacious, for, 
Time the master of all beings has brought you to an end."
"How is it possible that you, who knew the doctrine of political ethics obtained an unforeseen 
death? You, who knew the science of expediency, were indeed skilled in warding off calamities"
"O, Rama, the lotus eyed! The night of destroying time which was very much cruel and 
terrible thus has encircled you, embezzled you and snatched you away from me."
"O, the mighty armed! O, the best of men! Leaving the miserable me, you lied down here, 
embracing the earth as your beloved"
"O, valiant Rama! Here is your bow which was decorated with gold, dear to me and worshipped 
diligently by you with sandal paste and wreath of flowers."
"O, the faultless Rama! Surely, you must have met in heaven your father and my father-in- 
law Dasaratha as well as all the multitude of manes."
"You have abandoned your own pious lineage of royal sages but whereas you performed a 
great act, which illuminated the heaven like a luminary."
"O, prince! Why don't you look at me? Why don't you reply me, a wife who lived with you 
together since the time of obtaining me as a girl by you as a boy."
"O, Rama! Remember your solemn promise at the time of our marriage, saying I shall have 
righteous conduct with you' Take me also with you, wretched as I Am."
"O, Rama the best of beings! Why have you gone away, quitting me like this? Leaving me, 
the miserable woman, why have you gone to the other world from this world?"
"That beautiful body, which was cuddled by me with divine essences, is now being dragged 
about by wild beasts."
"Why are you not securing the privilege of being cremated with a sacrificial fire, even 
though you have worshipped the Lord through sacrificial performances such as Agnishtoma, duly furnished 
with abundant gifts?".
"Kausalya absorbed as she was with grief can only see Lakshmana alone returned out of 
the three who attained exile."
"He will narrate surely to her when enquired, about your slaughter as also the killing 
of the army of your alley, by demons at night."
"O, Rama! Hearing that you were killed while sleeping and that I was kept in the house 
of ogres, she will be no more, as her heart will be broken."
"The strong and faultless prince Rama was killed in a small puddle, after crossing the 
ocean, for the cause of me, an unworthy woman."
"I, the obloquy of my race, was wedded by Rama due to ignorance. Thus, a wife herself 
has eventually proved to be the cause for death of Rama, an honorable man."
"Even though I was a wife of Rama who showed hospitality to all the guests, it is I, 
that very person, who is weeping here and now, because without doubt, in a previous existence, an excellent 
gift was refused by me (to an eligible person)."
"Unite the wife with the husband and without delay, arrange to kill me right at the head 
of Rama. Thus, you will perform an admirable and auspicious act."
"O, Ravana! Join my head with his head and my body with his body. I shall go along the 
path of my magnanimous Lord."
The wide-eyed Sita, seeing her husband's head and bow there again and again, was tormented 
with grief and lamented as aforesaid.
While Seetha was lamenting thus, a demon who was a royal guard approached his Lord there 
with his joined palms in salutation (and cried as follows):
"May you be victorious, O noble Lord!" he respectfully announced thus, thereby winning 
his pleasure and informed that Prahasta the army chief had come.
"O, Lord! Prahasta has come with all ministers. He has sent me, eager as he is, to see 
you."
"O, king, endowed with patience! There is a little urgent work by way of king's duty. 
Please accord them your audience now."
Hearing the aforesaid communication of the demon, Ravana left the garden of Ashoka and 
bestowed audience to his ministers.
He deliberated with his ministers as to what action in its entirety to be pursued and 
entered the council-chamber and issued his commands in accordance with the knowledge he possessed of 
Rama's forces.
Soon after the departure of Ravana, the illusory head and bow had vanished.
Then, Ravana the king of demons in consultation with his highly powerful ministers, decided 
on the measures he would adopt against Rama.
Ravana the king of demons, resembling Yama the god of death, addressed all the generals 
standing nearby, devoted to his interests as follows:
"By a sound of a drum beaten audibly with a drum stick, immediately summon all my forces. 
Do not tell them the reason for which I am calling."
Then, the messengers answered, "So be it" obedient as they were to his words and instantly 
gathered a huge army together and informed their lord longing for fight, that they had since assembled 
the army.
undefined
undefined
undefined

"I am indeed hearing a delight mention of my lord, who proceeded to the vast forest
so many years ago.

"This common saying sounds to me good, that bliss comes to a surviving man, even if
it be after a hundred years!"

"How and on what ground, an alliance has been concluded between Rama and the monkeys
and at what place? Tell the truth to me, enquiring as I am."

Seated comfortably on a cushion and interrogated by Bharata, Hanuma thereupon began
to narrate the entire exploits of Rama in the forest.

"O Lord, the long-armed! How your mother was conferred with two boons by your
father, how Rama was sent to exile, how Dasaratha the king died, with a shocking sorrow for his
son's exile, how you were brought quickly from Rajagriha (the seat of government of Kekaya kings)
by the envoys, how sovereignty was not coveted by you when you returned to Ayodhya, how on your
going to mount Chitrakuta, your, elder brother the tormentator of enemies was invited by you who
followed righteousness to take back the kingdom, how Rama who stood by his father's words,
renounced the kingdom and stood by his father's words, renounced the kingdom and how your returned
to Ayodhya, taking with you the wooden sandals all this is known accurately to you. Hear from me
now, that which occurred after you had returned to Ayodhya."

"When you had gone away, that forest (of Chitrakuta) then assumed a very miserable
appearance, with the frightened animals and birds (on seeing strange people there)."

"Rama, thereupon, entered that large, terrific and solitary forest of Dandaka, which
had been trampled by elephants and extensive with lions, tigers and deers."

"In front of them, even as they were going in that dense forest, there appeared
Viradha, a demon, uttering forth a very loud roar.

"They cast him, who rushed with uplifted arms towards them, into a pit, turning his
head bent low, and who was emitting a loud cry, like an elephant."

"Carrying out that ardous task, Rama and Lakshmana, both the brothers, went to the
beautiful hermitage of Sharbhanga, in that evening.

"Offering salutation to all the hermits when Sharabhanga ascended to heaven, Rama
who truly mighty, reached the region of Janasthana."

"Thereafter, a female-demon called Surpanakha sought the presence of Rama. As
ordered by Rama, the mighty Lakshmana thereupon rose quickly and seizing a sword, chopped off her
ears and nose."

"Fourteen thousand demons, inhabiting Janasthana-region, were killed by the
great-souled Rama, while sojourning that region."

"The demons, who came together at the battle-front, were wholly finished by Rama
alone, in a fraction of a quarter of a day."

"The demons who were the mighty inhabitants of Dandaka-forest, who were causing
obstacles to the austerity of the ascetics, were killed by Rama."

"The demons were smashed in the battle. Khara (their leader) also was killed. After
killing Dushana (his brother) first, Trishira (the other brother) was killed thereafter."

"Tormented by the incident of destruction of demons, the foolish Surpanakha sought
refuge with Ravana. Disguised in the form of a deer studded with precious stones, a terrific demon
by name, Maricha, a follower of Ravana, allured Seetha."

"That Seetha, on seeing it, told Rama, 'Let this deer be caught. Our hermitage will
turn out to be charming and pleasing to the eye'."

"Thereupon, Rama wielding a bow in his arm, chased that deer and killed that running
one, with an arrow of curved knots."

"O good sir! While Rama was chasing the deer and even when Lakshmana had gone out,
Ravana forthwith entered their hermitage during that interval."

"Ravana, the demon, seized Seetha, even as a planet like Mars would obscure the
constellation, Rohini. Having killed a vulture named Jatayu, who sought to deliver her, Ravana then
went quickly in haste, taking Seetha with him"

"Then, in surprise, some monkeys who was staying on a mountain-peak, looking like
mountain, saw, with astonishment writ large in their faces, Ravana the king of demons, passing that
way, taking away Seetha."

"Going still faster and ascending along with Seetha, the aerial car, Pushpaka, which
was as swift as thought, the mighty Ravana the king of demons thereupon entered the City of
Lanka."

"Conducting that Seetha into a large beautiful mansion, embellished with gold, that
Ravana sought to cajole her gently with his words."

"Caring a straw for that Ravana and his talk, Seetha, later, actually remained in
Ashoka-grove."

"Having killed that deer, Rama while returning to the hermitage, saw the vulture
(Jatayu) in the forest. Rama was greatly disturbed. Seeing the vulture (Jatayu) who was dearer to
him than his own father killed, Rama was disturbed."

"While searching for Seetha, RAma along with Lakshmana strolled after blossomed
woodlands along the bank of Godavari-river."

"They met, in that great forest, a demon by name Kabandha. Then according to the
advice of Kabandha, Rama of true prowess met Sugreeva, after heading for Mount Rishyamuka."

"Even before they met, a meeting of hearts through affinity, had taken place between
them. Sugreeva had been banished in the past by the enraged Vali, his elder brother and as a result
of mutual talks, affection deeply arose between Rama and Sugreeva."

"Having killed with the strength of his arms in combat, the mighty Vali with a
colossal body, Rama caused the kingdom of Sugreeva restored.

"Sugreeva, who was established in his kingdom with all, his monkeys, had given his
pledge to Rama, to commence a search for Seetha the princess."

"Ten crores of monkeys were accordingly commanded by the great-souled Sugreeva and
sent to all the four quarters."

"Having lost our way in Vindhya, the foremost of mountain-ranges, a long time
slipped past us and we felt sore-stricken with sorrow."

"Meanwhile, the brother of Jatayu (the king of vultures), Sampati by name, precisely
communicated to us that Seetha was dwelling in the habitation of Ravana."

"Removing the grief of my kinsfolk, who were seized with sorrow, I, as such, crossed
one hundred yojanas (eight hundred miles of the ocean), resorting to my own strength."

"There, I saw Seetha, living alone in a grove of Ashoka trees, clad in a soiled
silk-saree, looking cheerless, but unflinching in her vow."

"After meeting her and duly enquiring that faultless Seetha, everything of her, a
ring with the name, Rama engraved on it, was handed-over to her by me as a token."

"Receiving in return from her, a jewel (from her head), I came back to the northern
shore, successful as I was in my undertaking. On my return, that brilliant and valuable jewel was
given by me as a token to Rama who was unweary in action."

"On hearing the news of Seetha, Rama for his part regained the hope to survive, as a
dying patient would, on drinking the ambrosia."

"Excited as he was to put forth a war-effort, he set his mind on the destruction of
Lanka, as the fire-god intending to destroy all the three worlds, would, at the end of the
universe."

"Then, on reaching the ocean, he got a bridge constructed by Nala and through that
bridge, the army of the valiant monkeys crossed the ocean."

"Neela killed Prahasta. Rama, the scion of Raghu dynasty, personally killed
Kumbhakarna and Ravana. Lakshmana killed Indrajit, the son of Ravana."

"The illustrious Rama, the destroyer of enemies, happened to meet Indra the lord of
celestials, Yama the lord of dissolution, Varuna the lord of waters, Maheshvara, the great lord
(Shiva), Brahma the lord of creation as also Dasaratha (his deceased father) and was bestowed boons
by them. Sages and celestial masters who came there, too gave boons."

"Having been granted boons, Rama for his part flew to Kishkindha in an aerial car
called Pushpaka, along with the monkeys who gathered there."

"Reaching the coast-line of Ganga-river again, Rama is staying in the presence of
the sage, Bharadwaja. Tomorrow, when the moon will be in conjunction with the asteroid, Pushya you
will be able to see Rama, without any obstacle."

"Gladdened to hear Rama's impending return to Ayodhya in the sweet words of Hanuma,
Bharata offered his salutation by joining his palms together and spoke the following words, which
enraptured his mind: 'My desire has been fulfilled indeed after a long time'."
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then, those surviving troops of demons hastily told Ravana that Devantaka, Trishira,
Atikaya and other foremost of demons had been killed.

Thereupon, suddenly hearing of those who had been killed, Ravana the prosperous king
of demons, having his eyes filled with profuse tears; boarding over the terrific destroyal of his
son as also the death of his brothers, contemplated for long.

Then, seeing Ravana the king, miserably submerged in a sea of sorrow, Indrajit,
Ravana's son, the best among charioteers, spoke to him as follows:

"O father, the king of demons! You ought not to get embarrassed, while Indrajit is
alive. Anyone who is struck by Indrajit's arrows cannot indeed protect his life."

"Today, you will see Rama along with Lakshmana, with their bodies undistinguished,
scattered and dead, lying down on the floor, with their limbs diffused all over."

"Listen to Indrajit's promise, which is very firm, backed by valour and divine
blessing. Now itself, I will overwhelm Rama together with Lakshmana unfailing flood of arrows.

"Now itself, Indra, Yama, Vishnu, Rudra, Sadhyas (a class of celestial beings), the
fire-god, the sun and the moon can see my unlimited prowess, like the terrific prowess of Vishnu
(in his dwarf incarnation as Vamana) in the enclosure where a sacrifice was being performed by
Bali, the demon-king."

Thus speaking, that Indrajit, with an undepressed mind, after seeking permission
from the king, mounted his chariot with a speed equal to that of wind and yoked with excellent
donkeys.

That greatly resplendent Indrajit, the annihilator of enemies, having ascended a
chariot looking like the chariot of the sun, quickly went to the battle-front.

Many mighty demons with terrific prowess, with joy, holding excellent bows in their
hands, carrying lances, sharp-edged spears, swords, axes and maces as also armed with Bhushundis
(probably a kind of fire arms), mallets, cudgels, Shataghnis (cylindrical piece of wood studded
with iron spikes) and iron rods, followed that great souled Indrajit. Some rode on the back of
elephants, some ascended excellent horses, tigers, scorpions, cats, donkeys and camels,
looking.

That valiant Indrajit swiftly went to the battle-field with full blasts of couches
and kettle-drums.

Indrajit, the tormentator of enemies, with a parasol white as a couch and the moon,
shone like the sky with the full moon.

The valiant Indrajit, the foremost among all the wielders of bow and decked with
gold ornaments, was being fanned then with supremely charming whisks with handles of gold.

Seeing that son setting out with a large army, that glorious Ravana, the king of
demons, spoke as follows:

"O my dear son! There is no charioteer who can stand you as your rival. Indra the
lord of celestials was conquered by you. You can kill Rama, a mere human being, who is assailable.
How much more can I tell?" After hearing these words of Ravana Indrajit accepted his great
blessings.

With that Indrajit, having a splendour equal to that of the sun and having no
warrior who can stand him as his rival, the City of Lanka shone, like the sky shining with the
sun.

Reaching the battle-field, Indrajit of great splendour, the annihilator of enemies,
stationed his demons around his chariot.

Then, that foremost of demons, having a radiance equal to that of fire, with
excellent sacrificial incantations, performed a sacrifice, as per rules, making an oblation to the
fire.

That valiant leader of demons offered oblations to fire there, with garlands and
pounded sandalwood, including clarified butter and parched grain.

That sacrificial rite was performed with weapons serving as reeds, chips of
Vibhishaka tree serving as fuel, then using red pieces of cloth and the sacrificial ladle made of
iron.

Duly spreading fire with reeds (in the form of other weapons) accompanied by lances
there, Indrajit elapsed the neck of a live goat of dark hue (for offering it to the fire as an
oblation).

From the great fire of flames, set ablaze by that offering having been thrown into
it acting at once without smoke, appeared such signs as had beckoned victory (of the past).

The fire, resembling the molten gold, rising up on its own and having flames
revolving from left to right, accepted that oblation.

Indrajit, who was skilled in the use of mystic missiles, invoked the missile
presided over by Brahma and charged it on his bow, chariot and all.

While that missile was being invoked and the sacrificial fire propitiated, the
firmament including the sun, the moon, other planets and lunar mansions trembled with fear.

Having propitiated offering in fire, Indrajit, having a splendour shining like the
fire, having a might similar to that of Indra, and possessing an unimaginable prowess, became
himself invisible in the sky, with the bow, arrows, sword, chariot, horses, charioteer and all.

Then, the army of demons, extensive with horses and chariots, embellished by banners
and flags, set out with a desire to fight, roaring.

They killed the monkeys in the battle-field with many wonderful and ornamental
arrows, possessing great velocity as also lances and goads.

Seeing those demons, the most enraged Indrajit on his part spoke to them as follows:
"All of you fight enthusiastically with an intent to kill the monkeys."

Roaring with a desire for victory, all those demons thereafter terribly rained
showers of arrows on monkeys.

That Indrajit, on his part, along with his demons in the battle-field, destroyed the
monkeys with Nalika (broad-headed) arrows, steel arrows, maces and clubs.

Those monkeys, wielding trees as their weapons, being struck in the battle-field,
quickly rained mountains and trees on Indrajit.

Indrajit the son of Ravana, on his part, possessing great splendour and great
strength, was enraged and wounded the bodies of the monkeys.

Bringing enormous delight to the demons that enraged Indrajit severed off the
monkeys by nines, fives and sevens with a single arrow.

That most invincible chief of demons, with arrows decked with gold, having
brilliance equal to the sun, destroyed the monkeys in battle.

Those monkeys, tormented by the arrows in battle, with their limbs severed, fell
down with their aspirations shaken, like the great demons fallen down by the celestials.

Those excellent monkeys with anger attacked Indrajit, who was tormenting them like
the sun with his terrific ray-like the sun with his terrific ray-like arrows.

Then, all the monkeys, with their bodies severed, having lost their consciousness
and perturbed as they were, having their limbs dampened with blood, took to their heels.

Those monkeys, wielding mountains as their weapons, roaring in the battle field,
without turning back, abandoned their lives, showing their courage for the sake of Rama.

Continuing to stay in the battle-field, those monkeys rained trees, mountain-peaks
and rocks on Indrajit.

Indrajit of great splendour and the conqueror of battles, kept off that great rain
of deadly hail of trees and rocks.

Thereupon, the capable Indrajit with his arrows, identical of fire and looking like
serpents in battle, split the armies of monkeys.

Indrajit struck Gandhamadana with eighteen sharp arrows and also struck Neela, who
was standing at a far-away place, with nine arrows.

Indrajit having a great prowess, struck Mainda with seven arrows, which can tear
asunder vital parts and also struck Gaja with five arrows in battle.

Indrajit then struck Jambavan with ten arrows and Nila with thirty arrows. He also
struck Sugreeva, Rishabha, Angada and Dvivida with sharp and terrific arrows endowed with boons and
made them breathless.

That enraged Indrajit, then looking like an excited fire that is to destroy the
world, tormented other chiefs of monkeys too with many arrows.

He harassed the armies of monkeys' fast-moving arrows looking like the sun in their
splendour.

That enthusiastic Indrajit, with a great pleasure, saw that exclusive army of
monkeys, drenched in blood and tormented by a multitude of arrows.

Indrajit, the son of Ravana, possessing a great splendour power and strength, again
generating a terrific rain of arrows and weapons, destroyed the army of monkeys from all sides.

Leaving off his army from that great battle-field and becoming invisible, Indrajit
advanced towards the monkeys and quickly rained terrific hail of arrows on those armies of monkeys,
as black cloud downpours the rain.

In that battle, those mountain-like monkeys as victims of conjuring tricks with
their bodies torn into pieces by Indrajit's arrows and roaring as they were with discordant notes,
fell down on earth, like mountains struck by Indra's thunder bolt.

Those monkeys in battle saw only arrows with pointed tips falling on the armies of
monkeys. They could not see there, that Indrajit the demon, the enemy of Indra, remaining concealed
by his conjuring trick.

Then, the mighty Indrajit, the leader of demons, covered all the quarters with
hundreds of sharply pointed arrows, having splendour of the sun and tore asunder the
monkey-chiefs.

Indrajit excessively rained on the army of monkeys' pikes, swords and axes, shining
like augmented and flaming fire and shooting forth incandescent flames with sparks.

Struck by the Indrajit's arrows, shining brightly as fire, the monkey-commanders
then looked like Kimshuka trees bearing crimson flowers.

Those excellent monkeys, torn asunder by that chief of demons, approaching at each
other and roaring in a discordant tone, fell down on the ground.

Banged in the eyes by arrows, some monkeys looking up towards the sky, joined each
other and fell down on the floor.

With lances, spikes and sharp arrows, charged with sacred texts, Indrajit the
excellent demon struck all those foremost of monkeys, namely Hanuman, Sugreeva, Angada,
Gandhamadana, Jambavan, Sushena, Vegadarshina, Mainda, Dvivida, Nila, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Kesari,
Hariloma, Vidyuddamshtra, Suryanana, Jyothimukha, a monkey called Dadhimukha, Pavakaksha, Nala as
also a monkey named Kumuda.

Tearing asunder the principal monkey-warriors by maces and arrows, which were of
golden colour, that Indrajit rained a multitude of showers of arrows equal to sun's rays on Rama
and Lakshmana.

Ignoring that showering rain of arrows, as though they are mere showers of rain,
that Rama of the most wonderful luster, looking around thoroughly, then spoke to Lakshmana as
follows:

"O Lakshmana! This Indrajit, by a great missile, is throwing down our army of
monkeys and tormenting us incessantly with his sharp arrows."

"How can the mighty and composed Indrajit on whom a boon has been bestowed by Brahma
and who has concealed his terrible form who stands with his weapons uplifted eventhough his body is
visible be killed in the battle today?

"I think the self-born Brahma who is the source of the universe is inconceivable and
this missile is presided over by him. O wise one! Remaining undistracted in mind, you bear along
with me today the hail of arrows here."

"Let this chief of demons, who is surpassing all, be covered with a multitude of
showers of arrows. This entire army of Sugreeva, whose leading warriors have fallen, looks no more
charming."

"Finding both of us fallen unconscious without displaying any joy or anger as also
having desisted from fighting, Indrajit will certainly return to Lanka, after having obtained
laurels of battle in its beginning itself."

Thereafter, Rama and Lakshmana there became struck by a multitude of arrows of
Indrajit. That leader of demons also there, causing affliction to both of them, roared with a
thrill of rapture in battle.

Thus causing the army of monkeys along with Rama and Lakshmana to become despondent
in battle, that Indrajit, getting eulogized by the demons, quickly reached the city of Lanka which
was being protected by Ravana's arms. Then, Indrajit cheerfully informed all that had happened, to
his father.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the words of Vibhishana, Indrajit was excited with rage, spoke harsh words
and rushed forward in fury.

Indrajit was looking like Yama the lord of Death at the time of dissolution of the
world, sitting in a well-decorated and distinguished chariot yoked with black horses, having
upraised sword and weapons, raising a big terrific enormous strong and swift bow and laying hold of
arrows which can torment the enemies.

The mighty the destroyer of adversaries, wielding a large bow, fully adorned, and
seated in a chariot saw that Lakshmana who was embellished with his own splendor.

Indrajit hurriedly spoke to those foremost of monkeys and to this Lakshmana, who
ascended Hanuma's back with a splendor of the sun shining on Mount Udaya and also with Vibhishana
as follows: "You behold my prowess now."

"Now, you can face an unconquerable stream of arrows, like rain, released in the
sky, as discharged from my bow in the battle-field."

"Today my arrows released from my large bow will destroy your bodies, as fire
consumes a pile of cotton."

"Today, I will send all of you to the world of Yama the lord of Death, by piercing
you with my sharp arrows and hurling the pikes, javelins and lances on you."

"Who can stand before me, while I release streams of arrows with my swift-hand in
battle, thundering like a cloud?"

"Earlier on that day, in a nocturnal battle, both of you along with Sugreeva and
other followers, were made unconscious by my arrows which were like thunderbolts and tips of
missiles as also you were made to fall down on the floor."

"Do you not have that remembrance? I presume clearly that you are on the road to
Yama the lord of Death, since you have come to give battle to me, enraged as I am, like a venomous
serpent."

Enraged in hearing that roaring of Indrajit, Lakshmana then spoke the following
words, with a courageous countenance.

"O demon! It has been proclaimed by you about the successful conclusion of your
tasks, eventhough it is difficult to achieve them. He alone is clever, whoever carries through his
undertakings in practice."

"O evil-minded one! You are thinking that you have accomplished your end, by
proclaiming through word alone, the achievement of your end, which is difficult to attain for
anyone, though you, as such, lack in capacity to achieve your purpose."

"The path, which was followed on that day by you, becoming invisible in the
battle-field, is the one trodden by thieves and is not the path followed by valiant ones."

"O demon! Having reached the range of your arrows, I am standing before you.
Therefore show your prowess today. Why should you brag with your words?

Hearing those words, the mighty Indrajit, victorious in battle, reaching his
terrific bow, released sharp arrows from it.

Duly reaching Lakshmana, the arrows released by Indrajit, which rushed with great
speed and were as deadly as the venom of serpents, fell like the hissing of snakes.

The swift Indrajit, the son of Ravana, with his arrows of very great velocity, in
that battle, struck Lakshmana who was endowed with auspicious body-marks.

That glorious Lakshmana, drenched in blood, with his body very much wounded by
arrows, shone like a smokeless flame.

Mulling over his own feat, Indrajit for his part, approaching Lakshmana and emitting
an exceedingly loud roar, spoke the following words:

"The sharp-edged and deadly arrows, with their wings, released from my bow, will now
take your life, O Lakshmana!"

"O Lakshmana! Let a number of Jackals, multitude of hawks and vultures descend upon
you, when struck down by me, you are dead."

"The exceedingly evil-minded Rama now itself can see you, a mere kshatriya (military
class only for a name sake), ever ignoble and his devoted brother, killed by me."

"O Lakshmana! Rama will see you, struck down by me today, with your armour dropped
down, bow thrown about and head dismantled."

Lakshmana, understanding the sense of the word, replied in the following logical
words to the enraged Indrajit thus speaking harshly.

"O evil-minded one! Give up strength of speech in your empty words. O demons! You
are doing cruel acts. Why do you indulge in such idle talk? Make it active with your good
work."

"O demon! Without performing that act, why do you boast yourself here? Perform that
act by which I can believe your brag."

"O the worst of persons! Without speaking even a few harsh words, without abusing
you and without bragging myself, Lo! I will kill you."

Thus speaking, Lakshmana stretching five steel arrows upto the ear, dug them into
the demon's chest with a great speed.

The arrows, blazing like serpents and feathered with fine plumes, shone like
sun-rays in that demon's chest.

Struck with arrows by Lakshmana, that enraged Indrajit pierced in return three
arrows well-directed towards Lakshmana.

That fight between Lakshmana, the foremost among men and Indrajit, the formost among
demons, who wished to conquer one over the other in battle, was most terrific and tumultuous.

Both were endowed with strength. Both were distinguished for their prowess. Both
were exceedingly difficult to conquer and peerless in strength and courage.

Those two heroes, who were difficult to overcome in battle, fought at that moment
like two plants figuring in the sky and like Indra and Vritra, the demon.

Then, the two warriors, who were engaged in releasing several streams of arrows,
fought like two lions. Lakshmana the foremost among humans and Indrajit the foremost among demons
fought with rejoice.

Thereupon, Lakshmana the tormentator of enemies, fitting his arrows to his bow,
released arrows on Indrajit, hissing like an enraged serpent.

Hearing the twang of the bow-string of Lakshmana, Indrajit the Chief of demons
became pale-faced and fixed his gaze on Lakshmana.

Seeing Indrajit (the son of Ravana) pale-faced, Vibhishana spoke as follows to
Lakshmana, who was fully absorbed in the fight.

"O the long-armed Lakshmana! I infer on the strength of the indications which I see
in Indrajit, that he is disappointed. There is no doubt about it. Make haste."

Thereupon, fitting to his bow sharp arrows, resembling poisonous snakes, Lakshmana
discharged those arrows which looked like serpents full of venom to him.

Hit by Lakshmana with arrows, which invaded all his senses, like the hit of Indra's
thunderbolt, Indrajit became stupefied for a moment.

Regaining his consciousness within a moment, with his senses restored, that Indrajit
saw the valiant Lakshmana engaged in the battle.

With blood-red eyes in anger, Indrajit walked towards Lakshmana. Approaching
Lakshmana, he again spoke the following harsh words to him:

"Don't you remember my prowess in the first encounter, when you along with your
brother, was bound by me and you wriggled on the floor?"

"At first, both of you along with your foremost warriors in a major encounter, were
indeed laid down unconscious on the ground, by my arrows which were equal to Indra's
thunderbolt."

"The fact that you desire to attack me means that either the remembrance of it no
longer exists in you or I presume you desire to go clearly to the abode of Yama the lord of
Death."

"If my prowess was not witnessed by you in the first encounter, I will show it
today. Stand ready for it now."

Thus speaking, he struck Lakshmana with seven arrows and Hanuma with ten excellent
sharp-edged arrows.

Then, the valiant Idnrajit with anger and with twice as much vehemence, wounded
Vibhishana with a hundred well-aimed arrows.

Seeing that feat accomplished by Indrajit, yet disregarding it, deriding it by
saying "This is noting" and taking up terrific arrows, the fearless and enraged Lakshmana the
younger brother of Rama and foremost among men, then discharged them against Indrajit in
battle.

"O demon! Heroes who come to battle do not strike like this. These arrows of yours
are light, weak and mild indeed."

"Warriors, who wish to win in battle, do not fight like this." Thus speaking,
Lakshmana the wielder of a bow, streamed forth arrows on him.

A large golden armour, broken to pieces by Lakshmana's arrows, slipped down in the
middle of chariot, like a cob-web of stars falling from the sky.

The valiant Indrajit, with his armour disheveled by the steel arrows, was wounded in
battle and looked like the sun at dawn.

Thereafter, the valiant Indrajit of terrific prowess was enraged and wounded
Lakshmana with a thousand arrows in battle.

The large celestial armour of Lakshmana broke into pieces. The two warriors vied
with each other in offence and retaliation in their attack.

Those two warriors, with their entire bodies lacerated in combat, smeared with blood
all around and breathing heavily, fought the battle tumultuously.

Thos mighty warriors, skilled in warfare, were cutting through each other, for a
long time, with sharp arrows.

Those two heroes f terrific prowess stay on strenuously trying to secure their own
victory, covered as they were, all over with a multitude of arrows as also their armour and
standards torn to pieces. They stood emitting hot blood, as two water-falls gushing hot water.

Much of a time lapsed while the two warriors fought loosing terrific stream of
arrows, then with an awful clamour, like two dark destructive clouds raining from the sky. They
neither trned their back from the battle, nor experienced any fatigue.

Displaying their missiles again and again, the two warriors, who were excellent
among those skilled in the use missiles, fastened a net work of arrows both large and small, in the
sky.

Loosing their arrows faultlessly, gracefully and easily in a wonderful way, both the
man and the demon carried on a tumultuous and terrific war.

Their terrific and tumultuous sound could be heard one by one repeatedly. That sound
created a tremble in people, like a violent thunder-storm.

That clamour of those two warriors, who were engaged thus in that martial act,
resembled the rumbling of two dreadful thundering clouds in the sky.

Those two mighty and glorious warriors, who were determined to gain victory over one
another, wounded with golden-shafted steel arrows, were profusely giving out blood.

Fallen on their limbs, the golden-shafted arrows, dropped on the battle-field,
smeared with blood and pierced into the surface of the earth.

Some more arrows released by those two warriors clashed in thousands with sharp
weapons in the sky and shattered and tore them.

The terrific pile of arrows in battle appeared like a mass of sacred Kusha grass by
the side of two blazing fires at a sacrifice.

The wounded bodies of those two mighty warriors shone like Kimshuka and Shalmali
(silk-cotton) trees in full blossom, deprived of leaves.

Indrajit and Lakshmana who were time and again wishing to attain victory one over
the other, carried out tumultuous and terrific battle.

In the combat, Lakshmana was striking Indrajit and Indrajit too was striking
Lakshmana. Both of them were striking each other and did not experience any weariness.

With a multitude of arrows dug deep into their bodies, those two warriors, of great
prowess and swiftness, shone like two mountains shooting forth plants from them.

At that time, all their limbs, dampened with blood and thickly covered with arrows
shone very much like blazing fires.

A lot of time lapsed in the meanwhile past the two warriors. They neither turned
their back from the battle nor experienced any fatigue.

Then, to relieve martial weariness of Lakshmana, who did not experience defeat in
any facet of war, the great-souled Vibhishana, offering agreeable and salutary words, took up his
position, on reaching the battle-field.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then, Sugreeva of great majesty, the king of monkeys spoke (the following)
meaningful words to Hanuma, in order to inform him what they should do next.

"Since Kumbhakarna and his four sons were killed, Ravana cannot give any defense
now".

"Let those dexterous monkeys, possessing the strength of lions, taking torches in
their hands, rush towards Lanka quickly, in order to set ablaze the abode of Ravana."

Then at the sunset of that awful evening, those foremost of the monkeys, went
towards Lanka, with torches in their hands.

When the troops of monkeys, with torches in their hands, attacked Lanka on all
sides, the diversely eyed demons who were holding the position of guards, suddenly fled away.

Those monkeys, feeling gladdened, threw fire to the towering gates, attics, streets,
various byways and mansions.

Then, the fire consumed thousands of houses of demons. Mansions of mountainous forms
fell down on the ground.

Aloe, excellent sandalwood of great value, pearls, glossy gems, diamonds and corals
were burnt there.

Linen, charming silk, blankets of sheep's wool, various kinds of ram's wool, gold
ornaments and weapons were burnt there.

The ornaments, saddles etc. of diverse and peculiar designs of horses, the chains
worn round the neck of the elephants as also their girths and polished ornaments meant for the
chariots were also burnt.

Coats of mail of the warriors, the armour of the elephants and horses, swords, bows,
bow-strings, arrows, lances, goads and javelins were burnt there.

The fire raging on all sides burnt blankets and rugs made of the hair of animals,
whisks made of the hair of the tails, the skins of tigers, many birds, palaces inlaid with pearls
and gems and various kinds of stores of arms.

Then, the fire burnt away many kinds of bright coloured houses of all demons, who
were greedily desirous of their homes. The fire there burnt away hundreds and thousands of
inhabitants of Lanka, who were protected by gold coloured armoury and decked with garlands,
ornaments and garments, with quivering eyes due to inebriation, moving with lustful walking, who
were seized with fury against their enemy, who carried maces, pikes and swords in their hands, who
were eating and drinking too or lay fast asleep on splendid beds with their loved ones and who were
decamping quickly to all sides, taking their sons with them, frightened and fearing up again and
again.

The fire there burnt away the houses, which were strong, very valuable, with
profound qualities, decked in gold with moon shapes and crescent shapes, which rose high with their
top rooms, provided all round with beautiful windows, furnished with seats coaches etc., decorated
with gems and corals, as though touching the sky, rendered noisy with notes of herons, peacocks,
veena the Indian lute and the jingling of ornaments as also appearing like mountains.

Surrounded by fire, the arch-ways shone like a collection of clouds bound by
lightning, at the end of a summer season.

The houses, surrounded by fire shone like the peaks of a large mountain, ignited by
a forest-fire.

Getting scorched in fire, beautiful women, while lying fast asleep in their
seven-storeyed mansions, gave up all connection with their ornaments and screamed loudly, saying
"ah! Alas!"

The houses too, surrounded by fire there, fell down like peaks of a great mountain,
struck by the thunder-bolt of Indra.

Those houses, while being burnt, shone, from afar, like the peaks of Himalayas being
consumed by fire on all sides.

That City of Lanka at night with its house-tops being burnt ablaze with flames,
looked like Kimshuka trees in full bloom.

With their elephants let loose by the superintendents of the elephants and horses
too set free, Lanka was like an ocean, with roaming alligators in it at the end of a
world-cycle.

Here, seeing a horse being let loose, an elephant went back frightened. There,
seeing a frightened elephant, a horse turned back with an alarm.

While Lanka was being burnt, the great ocean, with its image reflected on its
waters, assumed like a great sea with red waters.

That City burnt by the monkeys, within a short time, became transformed like the
earth burning at the time of terrific dissolution of this world.

The noise of the women-folk, who were burnt by fire and covered with smoke, roaring
loudly, was heard upto one hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles).

Then the monkeys, eager to fight, bounced suddenly upon the other demons, whose
bodies had been severely burnt and who rushed out (to save their lives).

The loud noise made by the monkeys and the cry of the demons caused resounding of
all the ten quarters, the ocean and the earth.

Healed of their wounds and unperplexed, both those great souled princes, Rama and
Lakshmana seized hold of those two excellent bows.

Thereupon, Rama pulled his excellent bow, making a tumultuous twang, which struck
terror in demons.

Rama, drawing his great bow, was as shining at that time as Lord Shiva (the source
of Universe), stretching his bow, consisting of the Vedas in a great wrath (as at the time of
dissolution of the Universe).

The twang of the bow-string of Rama could be heard above both of those sounds. The
sound of the monkeys and the cry of the demons.

The raised voice of the monkeys, the cry of the demons and even the twang of Rama's
bow-string these three sounds pervaded all the ten quarters.

By the arrows released from Rama's bow, the main gate of that City looking like a
peak of Mount Kailasa, tumbled down, shattered, to the ground.

Thereupon, seeing Rama's arrows descending on seven-storeyed mansions and other
houses, the war-preparedness of the leaders of demons got disturbed.

To those demoniac leaders, who were preparing for the battle and emitting lion's
roars, that night became a night of final dissolution (presided over by Rudra, the lord of
destruction).

The monkey-chiefs were commanded by Sugreeva as follows: "O monkeys! Approaching the
nearest gate, begin to wage the war. Even though present at the scene of fighting, he among you who
proves futile by an escape, should be overtaken and killed as he will be quality of disobeying the
royal command."

Seeing those monkey-chiefs, standing at the gate, with flaming torches in their
hands, Ravana was enraged with fury.

All the ten directions were distracted because of Ravana's act of disorderly
movement of his body due to yawning and he looked like the wrath manifest in the limbs of Rudra
appearing with a form.

The enraged Ravana sent both Kumbha and Nimkumbha, the sons of Kumbhakarna, along
with a multitude of demons.

By the orders of Ravana, Yupaksha, Shonitaksha, Prajangha and Kampana along with the
aforesaid sons of Kumbhakarna set out for the battle.

Ravana instructed all those mighty demons thus, "O demons! Proceed now itself,
bellowing a lion's roar."

Incited by Ravana, the valiant demons then, wielding shining weapons and roaring
repeatedly, sallied forth from Lanka.

By the gleams of ornaments worn by their own natural splendour, those demons and
monkeys with their fires, made the sky fluorescent on all sides.

The effulgence of the moon there, the light of the stars and the splendour of the
ornaments of both the armies, while blazing, made the sky brilliant.

The effulgence of the moon, the splendour of the ornaments and the fluorescence of
the blazing planets made the armies of monkeys and demons glitter on all sides.

With the flames of the half-scorched houses there, the ocean on its part with its
agitated waves mingled with water, shone abundantly.

That army of demons was looking awful with flags and banners, with excellent axes
shaped like swords, consisting of terrific horses, chariots and elephants, crowded with
foot-soldiers of every description, distinguished by shining pikes, maces, swords, spears, lances
and bows, noted for its redoubtable valour and prowess, with shining lances and rendered noisy by
hundreds of tiny bells (tied around chariots, elephants etc), the arms of its warriors adorned with
sets of gold ornaments, their axes being brandished, mighty weapons being waved about, arrows
fitted to the bows and the whole atmosphere rendered fragrant by the abundance of sandal paste,
garlands and wine.

Seeing the army of demons, which came crowded with gallant warriors, thundered like
a huge cloud which was difficult to assail, the army of monkeys marched forth and made a loud
noise.

That large army of demons on its part went springing forward with all speed, towards
the hostile army, as moths towards a flame.

The excellent army of those demons, in which iron clubs and the tips of missiles
being brandished through the action of their arms, shone all the more brightly.

Thereafter, the monkeys desirous to fight there, striking the demons with trees,
rocks and fists, jumped up as though frenzied.

Likewise, the demons with their terrific prowess instantly tore off the heads of
those monkeys bouncing upon them, with sharp arrows.

The demons there strolled in the streets of Lanka, with their ears bitten off with
teeth, their skulls smashed with fists and their limbs broken by crag blows.

Even so, some demons with terrific form struck those chiefs among the monkeys, with
sharp swords, on all sides of the battle field.

One warrior killed the one who was killing another, a second one threw down the one
throwing down another; a third one scolded another who was scolding the other one; while a fourth
one chewed the one chewing another.

There, one said "Give me the blow. Another said, "He is giving". Yet another said,
"I am giving" some talked with one another, saying "Wait. Why do you take pains?"

In that very terrific war between monkeys and demons, some weapons were made futile.
Some weapons were dug into armours. Long lances were lifted up. Fists, pikes, swords and spears
were used as weapons of war.

In the battle-front, the demons killed monkeys in tens and sevens. The monkeys too
threw the demons down in tens and sevens.

Catching hold of the army of demons, whose hair and raiment's were kept in order
with difficulty and whose armours and standards were thrown away, the monkeys surrounded them on
all sides.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Meanwhile, Sugreeva the king of Monkeys, possessing a great splendour and a mighty
power, enquired saying, "Why is this army agitated, like a ship driven out of its course in
water?"

Hearing the words of Sugreeva, Angada the son of Vali replied, saying "Do you not
see the high-souled Rama and Lakshmana of the great chariot, those two valiant sons of Dasaratha
covered with darts lying all bloody in a bed of arrows?"

Thereupon, Sugreeva the Lord of Monkeys said to his son Angada: "To my mind, there
is some othere cause why the monkeys are bewildereed. There must be some danger ahead."

"Here, these monkeys are runnng away in all directions, with their eyes distended
with terror, throwing down their arms and looking dejected."

"They are not ashamed of one another. They are not looking behind than even. They
are jostling each other and leaping over those who have fallen."

In the midst of this turmoil, the valiant Vibhishana, wielding a mace in his hand
came there and cheered Sugreeva and Rama saying "Victory to Rama! Victory to Rama!."

Observing Vibhishana to be the cause of panic among the monkeys, Sugreeva spoke to
the illustrious Jambavan the king of Bears who stood near (as follows):

"It is Vibhishana who has come here. On seeing him, the foremost of monkeys seized
with terror have fled, deeming him to be Indrajit, Ravana's son."

"You reassemble those monkeys immediately, who in fear have scattered in many
directions and inform them that it is Vibhishana who has come!"

Thus spoken by Sugreeva, Jambavan the king of Bears called the fugitive monkeys back
and restored them to confidence.

Hearing the words of Jambavan the king of Bears, all those monkeys, on perceiving
Vibhishana, retraced their steps, shaking off their fear.

Meanwhile, the virtuous Vibhishana, on beholding Rama's body as also of Lakshmana's
covered with arrows, felt distressed.

Washing their eyes with his hands dipped in water, Vibhishana began to weap, with
anguish seizing his heart and lamented, saying:

"These two powerful and valiant warrriors have been brought tot his state by the
demons, the treacherous combatants."

"The son of my brother, that wicked youth of perverse soul in his demoniac cunning
mind, has decived those two honourable fighters."

"These two warriors, Rama and Lakshmana, who were struck badly by arrows and covered
with blood are lying on the earth, like two porcupines."

"These two lions among men, on whom depended the positon aspired by me, are lying
insensible, waiting for the dissolution of the body."

"Deprived of the hope now of becoming a king, I am as one dead, eventhough
surviving; while my rival Ravana sees his vow fulfilled and gets his desires realised."

Then, Sugreeva the magnanimous King of Monkeys embraced that Vibhishana thus
lamenting and spoke the following words:

"O, knower of what is right! You shall certainly reign over Lanka. Ravana and his
son will not acheive their purpose."

"The injury done to Rama and Lakshmana is not grave. Emerging from their swoon, they
will destroy Ravana with his hordes in battles."

Consoling and convincing Vibhishana thus, Sugreeva spoke to Sushena, his
father-in-law, who was on his side (as follows):

"Taking these two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana with the troops of monkeys who are
strong, you go to Kishkindha, till these two scourgers of their foes have recovered their
consciousness."

"As for me, I shall slay Ravana with his son and his relatives and bring back Seetha
as did Indra the Lord of celestials, the prosperity he had lost."

"Hearing the words of Sugreeva, Sushena replied as followers: " A highly terrific
and great was between celestials and demons was perceived by me."

"By making themselves invisible again and again, the demons skilled in the use of
arrows overcame the celestials despite their skill in bearing arms."

"To those celestials who were wounded, unconscious and almost deprived of life,
Brihaspati treated them by the aid of herbs accompanied by his spells of sacred formulas."

"Let the monkeys Sampati, Panasa and others go quickly in speed, to the ocean of
milk, to bring those herbs."

"These monkeys are conversant with those efficacious mountianous herbs - the
celestial Sanjivakarani and Vishalya, which were created by a God."

"In the bosom of the milky ocean the best of oceans, rise the mountains called
Chandra and Drona, where the ambrosia was formerly churned. These two excellent herbs exist
there."

"The celestials place dthose two mountain in the vast sea. O, King! Let Hanuman the
son of Wind-God go there."

In the meantime, a great wind arose, accompanied by massed clouds and lightning,
whipping up the salty waves in the ocean, causing the mountains to tremble as from an
earthquake.

"Large trees on the sand-banks had their branches broken by the mighty stroke of
Vata's wings and fell headlong into the briny waters of the ocean."

"The snakes became frightened. The snakes inhabiting there and all the marine
animals plunged quickly into the briny ocean."

Thereupon, all the monkeys saw within a moment, a mighty eagle, Garuda, the son of
Vinata, like unto a blazing torch.

On beholding Garuda the eagle which came there, the serpants who bound those two
warriors Rama and Lakshmana in the form of mighty arrows, fled away.

Thereupon, Garuda the eagle, coming into contact iwth Rama and Lakshmana d offering
them his good wishes, with his hands caressly touched their faces that were radiant like the
moon.

Their wounds, touched by Garuda the eagle, were healed. Their bodies soon became
smooth and well-rounded.

Their lustre, valour, strength, endurance and resolution, those great qualities,
also their perspicacity, intelligence and memory were re-doubled.

Lifting them up both who were like Indra, the highly majestic Garuda the eagle
embraced them. Rama also, being pleased, spoke to him (as follows):

"Now, by your grace, we both have overcome a great disaster created by Indrajit the
son of Ravana. We have been made strong as before."

"By meeting you thus, my heart is gladdened in the same manner as I am meeting
Dasaratha, my fatehr and Aja, my paternal grandfather."

"Who are you, the one endowed with beauty, having blissful garlands and anointments,
wearing clean garments and adorned iwth divine ornaments?"

The highly majestic and the mighty Garuda the eagle, the King of Birds, with his eys
widened in gladness and with a pleased heart, spoke to Rama as follows:

"O, Rama! I am your dearest friend Garuda dear as your own breath moving outside I
came here for the purpose of helping you, both."

"Either the most valiant demons or the exceedingly strong monkeys or the celestials
together with the celestial musicians having Devendra the Lord of celestials in their forefront are
unable to untie this awfully terrific entanglement of arrows created through his power of sorcery
by Indrajit of terrific deeds."

"These serpents, which took their base at, were none other than the sons of Kadru
with their sharp fangs, abundantly filled with poison, transformed into arrows, by the dint of
sorcery by Indrajit the demon."

"O, Rama the knower of righeousness and true to your promise! You, along with your
brother Lakshmana the annihilator of enemies, indeed are lucky."

"Hearing about this incident, I have hastened all at once, duly cherishing the love
and friendship (for you)."

"You have been released from this quite terrific shackle of arrows. Both of you
should maintain vigilance, all the time."

"All the demons by their very nature are treacherous fighters in battle. For you,
the warriors, your pue-mindedness and straight forwardeness are the strengths."

"What Indrajit has done, exemplifies how the demons are always crooked-minded. For
this reason, you should not trust the demons in battle."

That mighty Garuda, having spoken thus to Rama then and having affectionately
embraced him, began to take leave of him.

"O, Rama the knower of piety, affectionate even towards your enemies and my dear
fried! I wish to take leave of you." I shall proceed happily."

"O, hero! You need not be so curious to know the casue of my friendship. You will
know of it, once you have accomplished success in battle."

"When, under the flutter of your arrows, Lanka has been destroyed save for the aged
and the children and you have slain Ravana,. your enemy, you will bring back Seetha."

Having spoken thus, Garuda of swift flight, having beautiful wings, who had just
healed Rama's wounds in the presence of monkeys, having paid obeisance presence of monkeys, having
paid obeisance to him (by circumambulation) and taken him into his arms, entered the sky with the
speed of the wind.

Seeing Rama and Lakshmana healed of their wounds, the cheifs of monkeys haowled like
roars of lions and lashed their tails.

Thereupon, gongs were beaten, drums resounded, and couches were blown amid jumping
in joy of the monkeys as before.

Some other strong monkeys who use trees as maces in battle, waving their arms and
uprooting hundreds and thousands of various trees, stood there, ready for the battle.

Uttering great noises, frightning the demons and desirous to fight, the monkeys
reached the gates of Lanka.

Thereafter, a highly terrible and tumuluous sound arose among the leaders of the
monkeys, as, at the end of summer the roaring of thunder clouds in the mid-night.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then ensued a fierce and a prolonged chariot-duel between Rama and Ravana, which was
frightful to all the worlds.

Then, the army of demons and the huge army of mokeys, stood motionless with their
weapons held fast in their hands.

Having their hearts captivated in seeing those two warriors, a human being and a
demon, both in full strength engaged in a fight, all for their part experienced a great wonder.

Having their hands occupied with various kinds of weapons, all those warriors stood
amazed in mind in beholding that duel. They did not go for war on each other.

The demons beholding Ravana and the army of monkeys seeing Rama with their eyes in
amazement appeared as though they were paintings.

Having made up their minds and being firm in their anger, those two warriors for
their part, Rama and Ravana fought fearlessly, as it were, on seeing the portents in the
battle.

Rama, who was convinced that he was going to win and Ravana who was firmly persuaded
that he would die, then demonstrated the entire wealth of their prowess in battle on that
occasion.

Thereupon, the valiant Ravana, fitting his arrows with anger, released them,
directing them towards the flag-staff fixed on Rama's chariot.

Without even reaching the ensign on Indra's chariot and touching off the staff which
supported the banner of the chariot, the arrows fell on the ground.

Thereafter, the valiant Rama too, in great anger, stretching his bow, proceeded with
his mind, to return blow for blow.

Rama released a sharp arrow, looking like a huge serpent and which was unbearable,
as though blazing with its own splendour, directing towards Ravana's flag-staff.

As the brilliant Rama released the arrow towards the flag-staff, that arrow, tearing
asunder Ravana's flag-staf, entered the earth.

That standard, mounted on Ravana's chariot, having been torn off, fell on the
ground. Seeing the thrown-down piece of his flag-staff, that mighty Ravana stood blazing as though
he was laughing with intolerance. Flaming up with anger, he showered a stream of arrows afflicted
as he was, with the power of wrath.

Ravana struck Rama's horses with blazing arrows. Those divine horses were neither
shaken nor stumbled in the battle-field. They were indeed healthy at heart and felt as though they
were just struck with lotus-stalks.

Seeing those horses unstumbled, Ravana then was very much enraged and released
showers of arrows.

He also hurled maces, iron bludgeons, discs, iron clubs, mountain-tops, trees,
spikes and axes.

Unwearied as he was in his heart and in effort, Ravana then employed streams of
missiles as a creation of magic and also thousands of arrows.

In that battle, abundant rain of various missiles, which were tumultuous, generating
fear, terrific and attended with a terrible echo, descended.

Leaving alone Rama's chariot, Ravana released arrows on the army of monkeys on all
sides, thus wholly covering the sky.

Ravana released arrows with a mind, which had given up all hope of survival. Seeing
that Ravana, who was interested in the battle, putting forth his great effort, Rama fitted Sharp
arrows to his bow, as though laughing and thereupon he loosed the arrows in hundreds and
thousands.

Seeing those arrows, Ravana completely covered the sky with his own arrows. Due to
that dazzling shower of arrows then employed by the two warriors, the shining sky looked like a
second sky built with arrows.

While Rama and Ravana were discharging the arrows thus in the battle0field, no arrow
missed the target, no one failed to pierce the target and none had gone in vain. Colliding with
each other, they fell on the ground.

Releasing the arrows left and right continually, they fought at each other. With
their terrific arrows, they made the sky, bereft of even a breathing space.

Rama struck Ravana's horses. Ravana struck Rama's horses. Both the warriors then
struck at each other, doing anything before and after.

Those two extremely enraged warriors in this way, carried out are excellent combat.
A tumultuous battle ensued for an hour or so, causing the hair to stand erect.

The mighty Ravana and Rama carried out the fight well with sharp arrows in the
battle-field. That Ravana at that time was very much enraged with Rama, as his flag-staff was
thrown down.

All the created beings for their part gazed with an astonished mind on Rama and
Ravana, who thus were fighting at each other in the battle-field.

Furiously attacking each other in the battle-field, those excellent chariots of the
two warriors ran towards each other.

Intent on destroying each other, those chariots, displaying various types of
movements such as, moving in circles, moving straight and darting forward as also receding
forthwith, originated from the capabilities of those charioteers, assumed a terrible aspect.

Rama wounding Ravana and Ravana too wounding Rama, both of them had recourse to
speed in movement in their forward and backward motions.

Those excellent chariots, casting streams of arrows, strolled in the battle-field,
like two clouds pouring showers.

Showing various kinds of movement in the battle-field, those chariots then again
stood facing each other.

The shaft of the two chariots even as they stood at that moment, met one with the
other shaft the muzzle of the horses met the one with the other and the flags met the one with the
other flags.

Then Rama, with his four sharp arrows discharged from his bow, drove back the four
splendid horses of Ravana.

That Ravana, falling a prey to anger for retreating his horses, discharged sharp
arrows on Rama.

Rama, who was severely struck by the mighty Ravana, did not get upset nor was even
tottered.

Directing towards Matali, Indra's charioteer, Ravana hurled arrows with a sound
similar to that of a thunder-bolt.

Arrows of great speed, fallen on Matali's body, did not cause even a pretty little
of bewilderment or hurt on him in that battle.

Enraged at that daring attack on Matali, Rama who for his part did not feel provoked
by the attack on himself, made his enemy turn away by hurling a net work of arrows on him.

The valiant Rama discharged twenty, thirty, sixty and hundreds and thousands of
arrows on the enemy's chariot.

Thereupon, even Ravana, the enraged king of demons, who was seated in the chariot,
tormented Rama, by showering maces and mallets on him in the battle.

The battle thus started again by then, was tumultuous, causing one's hair to stand
erect. With the sounds of maces, mallets and iron rods and with the gusts raised by the plumes
adorning the flying arrows, the seven agitated oceans felt disquieted.

Thousands of all the demons and serpents, inhabiting in the nethermost subterranean
region of the agitated oceans, felt disturbed.

The entire earth, including mountains, groves and forests trembled. The sun too
became gloomy even the wind did not blow.

Then, the gods along with Gandharvas the celestial musicians, Siddhas the
semi-divine beings, great sages and all including Kinnaras the mythical beings and great serpents
became disquieted.

At that time, those gods along with troops of sages, saying "May all be well with
the cows and Brahmanas, May all the worlds endure forever, May Rama conquer Ravana!", saw a
terrific battle between Rama and Ravana, which caused one's hair to stand on end.

Seeing that matchless struggle and observing that the sky is its own compeer and the
ocean is its own analogue, the battle between Rama and Ravana can be likened only to the battle
between Rama and Ravana, the hosts of Gandharvas the celestial musicians and Apsaras, the heavenly
lymphs, looked on that battle between Rama and Ravana.

Thereupon, the great-armed Rama who augmented the fame of the kings born in Raghu
dynasty, stretching with anger, the serpent-like arrow with his bow, chopped off the glorious head
of Ravana, which was graced with blazing ear-rings. Then, all the three worlds saw that head,
fallen on the ground.

Another head, exactly similar to that head, cropped up on the shoulders of Ravana.
That second head was again chopped off by Rama, possessing a swift hand and who was swift in his
act.

The second head of Ravana was cut off by arrows in that battle. Soon after that head
was chopped off, it again rose into view.

Rama chopped off that head too with his arrows looking like thunderbolts. In the
same manner, a hundred of Ravana's heads of equal splendour were chopped off by Rama.

Yet, no certainty about Ravana's death could be seen. Thought equipped with many
arrows and well-versed with all kinds of missiles, the valiant Rama, the augmentor of Kausalya's
joy, then became thoughtful (said to himself as follows):

"What is the reason, these arrows by which Mareecha, Khara, Dushana, Kabandha in
Kroucha-forest, and Viradha in Dandaka-forest were killed, by which seven Sala trees and the
mountains were burst, by which Vali was killed and the ocean shaken up all these arrows which
provided immediate succour to me in battle, have proved of little efficacy in the case of
Ravana."

Thus absorbed in thought, Rama remained vigilant in the battle-field. He showered
streams of arrows in Ravana's chest.

Thereupon, even Ravana, the enraged king of demons, who was seated in his chariot,
tormented Rama by showering maces and mallets on him in the combat.

That great tumultuous battle, which caused one's hair to stand on end, took place in
the sky, on the ground and furthermore on the mountain.

While the gods, the demons, Yakshas the super-natural beings, the devils, the
serpents and the ogres were witnessing, that great battle occurred for seven days.

There was no respite in battle between Rama and Ravana, either in the might or in
the day-time or for an hour or even for a instant.

Not beholding the victory of Rama in the combat between Rama and Ravana that
great-souled Matali, the charioteer of Indra quickly spoke the following words to Rama, who was
still engaged in fighting.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing the valiant Lakshmana bathed in a stream of blood, when struck down in battle
with a spear by the mighty Ravana and having given a tumultuous fight, to the evil-minded Ravana,
Rama spoke as follows to Sushena, even while releasing a multitude of arrows (at Ravana).

"This heroic Lakshmana, falling down on earth yielding to Ravana's prowess, is
wiggling like a serpent, causing an increase in grief to me."

"My energy to fight is failing, even as I see this valiant Lakshmana, who is dearer
to me than life, bathed in blood, my mind being greatly disturbed."

"Of what use is life or happiness to me, if this illustrious brother of mine, who is
endowed with auspicious bodily marks and who always speaks highly of war, meets with his
death?"

"My valour is feeling shy, as it were. My bow seems to fall down from any hand. My
arrows are dropping down. My vision has been overcome with tears."

"My limbs seem to sink down, like those of men in sleep. I have a serious tension,
growing in me. I even wish to die."

"My brother has been struck down by the evil-minded Ravana, seriously wounded in his
vital parts, afflicted with agony and groaming."

Seeing his beloved brother, who was his very life-breath moving outside, Rama was
afflicted with excessive agony and gave himself up to anxiety and grief.

Seeing Lakshmana his brother lying wounded in the dust of the battle-field, he got
into extreme despondency and lamented (as follows), confused in mind, as he was:

"O the valiant Lakshmana! Even victory cannot create a pleasure for me. What
pleasure can the moon create for a man who has lost his vision?"

"What purpose of mine will be served by fighting or eve by life? When this Lakshmana
lies killed in the forefront of battle here, I have no use for the war."

"In the same way as the very glorious Lakshmana followed me When I was going to the
forest, I too will in the same way follow him to the abode of Yama the lord of Death."

"The demons, who fight treacherously, created this condition to Lakshmana, who loved
his relatives and who was ardently devoted forever to me."

"Wives may be obtained ever where. Relatives can be had every where. However, I do
not find a brother, born of the same womb, at such a place whatesoever."

The monkeys saw that Rama, thus lamenting with his mind reeling and distressed in
grief and pitiably sighing his breath repeatedly.

"Of what use is the kingdom for me, without Lakshmana, who was difficult to over
power? What can I tell to Sumitra, the mother who was so fond of her son?"

"I shall not be able to bear the reproach, which will be levelled by Sumitra. What
shall I pay to kausalya the mother or what shall I say to Kaikeya?"

"What shall I say to Bharata or to the mighty Shatrughna, when they ask me, how I
came back without Lakshmana even though I went to the forest along with him?"

"It is better to die at this place only, rather than hear the reproaches of one's
own people. What sinful act was done by me in a previous birth due to which my righteous brother
lies killed before me?

"Alas! O the powerful brother, the best of men! O the foremost among the valiant
men! Why are you going to the other world, deserting me?"

"O brother! Why don't you talk to me, even though I am lamenting? Rise and see! Why
are you lying down? See me, by opening your own eyes, miserable as I am."

"O the mighty armed! You have been indeed comforting me, whenever stricken with
grief, I roamed listlessly among mountains and forests or felt low-spirited."

Comforting Rama, whose mind was full of grief and who was thus lamenting, Sushena,
for his part, addressed the following excellent words:

"O the excellent among men! Give up this notion, which causes despondency in you,
this anguish which gives rise to grief and is as piercing as arrows, in the forefront of
battle."

"Lakshmana, the augmenter of prosperity, has not got into death. His countenance is
not changed, nor has it become dark."

"His face may be seen with a good brightness and very much placid. The palms of his
hands are resembling the petals of a lotus. His eyes too are very bright."

"O king! The appearance of the dead does not look like this. O hero, the annihilator
of enemies! He is all with his life. Do not worry."

"The repeatedly beating heart with the signs of breath of Lakshmana, lying on the
earth's surface, fast asleep, with his limbs relaxed are telling it, O the gallant prince!"

Having addressed the words thus to Rama, the highly learned Sushena spoke the
following words to Hanuma the great monkey, who was standing nearby:

"Proceeding from this place with full speed, O gentle one!, to the mountain called
Oushadhi (Mahodaya), which was already described to you previously by Jambavan, O brave one! Bring
here for restoring the great-souled and heroic Lakshmana to consciousness, the precious herb
Vishalyakarani (1) by name which was sprung up on its southern peak, Savarnakarnani (2),
Samjivakarani(3) and the precious herb, Samdhanakarani (4)."

Hearing those words, Hanuma, having sprung to Mount Oushadhi, could not identify
those precious herbs and became thoughtful.

The following thought arose to that Hanuma, whose strength was unlimited: "I will go
back, taking this mountain-peak itself."

"By conjecture, I understand that the delightful herb must have sprouted in this
mountain-peak. Sushena indeed has said so."

"If I go without taking Vishalyakarani, harm may come through passage of time and a
great perplexity may arise."

Thinking thus, the mighty Hanuma the excellent of monkeys, having gone quickly and
approaching that excellent mountain, taking that mountain-peak with his arms, shaking it violently
for three times and uprooting the mountain-peak, which was endowed with many trees in bloom, lifted
it up, so mighty as he was.

Taking that mountain-peak, which looked like a dark rainy cloud, that Hanuman jumped
up into the sky.

Arriving with a great speed, Hanuma putting down the mountain-peak and resting for a
while, spoke the following words to Sushena:

"O the excellent of monkeys! I have brought the entire mountain-peak, as I could not
identify those herbs."

Eulogizing Hanuma, who was thus narrating his trip, Sushena, the excellent of
monkeys, pulling out the herbs, took hold off them.

All those monkey-chiefs and even the gods were surprised to see that most difficult
feat of Hanuma.

Then, crushign that herb, Sushena the excellent of monkeys, having a great
splendour, administered it through Lakshmana's nose.

Duly inhaling it well, that Lakshmana, the annihilator of adversaries, having the
spear lodged in his body, raised quickly from the earth's surface rid as he was of the spear and
his pain.

Seeing that Lakshmana risen from the ground, the mokneys were overjoyed and
applauded Lakshmana, saying, "Excellent, excellent!".

Rama, the destroyer of enemies, said to Lakshmana, "come, come!" and embraced him
firmly with affection, with his eyes clouded with tears.

After embracing Lakshmana, Rama then said to him: "Luckily, O valiant one, I see you
here, returned from death."

"There is no purpose of mine, by me own life nor of Seetha nor of victory. If you
have attained demise, tell me what significnace is there for it to me?"

While the great souled Rama was speaking thus, the exhausted Lakshmana, in a feeble
tone, spoke the following words:

"Having solemnly taken that pledge (of killing Ravana) before, O brother true to
your promise, you ought not to speak as you have done like a weak and courageless man."

"There is no purpose of mine, by me own life nor of Seetha nor of victory. If you
have attained demise, tell me what significance is there for it to me?"

"O the faultless one! Getting into homelessness for my sake is not befitting of you.
Fulfill your promise now, by killing Ravana."

"An enemy who falls victim to your arrows, cannot turn out alive, as a huge elephant
which gets into the path of a roaring lion possessing terrible tusks."

"I, for my part, wish to see the death of this evil-minded fellow instantly, even
before this sun, having finished his task, does not sink below the horizon."

"O venerable hero! If you wish to kill Ravana in battle, if you wish to fulfill your
promise and if you feel affectionate towards Seetha, do as I tell you soon and now."
undefined
undefined
undefined
Seeing the marks of conflict on the person of Sugreeva, Rama the elder brother of Lakshmana 
after embracing Sugreeva spoke these words.
"Without consulting me closely, such a reckless act has been done by you, such a rashness 
is not seemly in a king."
"O, warrior longing for acts of daring! This wrong and reckless act has been done by 
you, causing me, this army and Vibhishana great anxiety."
"O, warrior! O, vanquisher of foes! Do not act thus in future. O, the mighty armed! O, 
annihilator of enemies! If you have come by some misfortune, I would have had nothing to do with Seetha, 
Bharata, Lakshmana or still younger Shatrughna or even with my own person."
"O, monkey of great strength, equal to Indra the god of celestials and Varuna the king 
of universe! If you have not returned, though I am conversant with your valour, this was my pre-determined 
resolve that having killed Ravana in fight with his sons forces and chariots, I should have installed 
Vibhishana as king of Lanka, placing the kingdom of Ayodhya in the hands of Bharata and renounced my 
life."
Hearing Rama's words, Sugreeva replied as follows: "O, brave Rama! Seeing Ravana who 
had taken away your consort and being conscious of my own strength, how can I act otherwise?"
Complimenting that hero Sugreeva who was thus speaking, Rama addressed Lakshmana, who 
was endowed with auspicious marks, saying:
"O, Lakshmana! Beside these fresh waters and trees laden with fruit, let us divide this 
multitude of troops, drawing it up in a battle array and remain alert."
"I foresee a terrible calamity to come, boding universal destruction and death to the 
intrepid bears, monkeys and demons."
"Harsh winds blow. The earth trembles. Mountain-peaks shake and the elephants bearing 
the earth trumpet."
"Sinister clouds prey-roar violently like carnivorous animals and let fall a rain mixed 
with drops of blood."
"The dusk, red as sandal, is full of horror and from the sun, this blazing mass of fire 
falls."
"Wile beasts and birds emit frantic cries, ill at ease and ominous, inspiring great fear, 
facing the sun."
"The moon shorn of its radiance, surrounded by black and fiery rays, burns red as at 
the time of destruction of the word and is creating an anguish in the night."
"O, Lakshmana! In the disk of the sun, a small halo with a black mark, fiery, shorn of 
its radiance and of coppery hue is seen."
"O, Lakshmana! The stars are not appearing as they should be duly foretelling their intention 
to hasten a final dissolution of the world."
"Crows, eagles and vultures are whirling round at a lower level. Jackals too are howling 
inauspicious sounds."
"The earth, crowded with rocks, darts and daggers discharged by monkeys and demons, will 
become a slime of flesh and blood."
"Now surrounded by the monkeys from all sides, let us make an attack on that invincible 
citadel ruled by Ravana quickly and swiftly."
Thus speaking to Lakshmana, the heroic Rama of great strength climbed down from that 
mountain-peak.
Having descended from that mountain, Rama, whose mind was set on righeousness, held a 
review of his own army, which was verily difficult to conquer for the enemies.
Rama, who knew the fitting moment to act, along with Sugreeva made ready the great army 
and commanded the army to advance, at the appropriate moment for the battle.
Rama, the mighty armed, together with the mighty army marched in front, wielding a bow, 
towards the city of Lanka, at the befitting moment.
Then, Vibhishana, Sugreeva, Hanuman, Jambavan the king of bears, Nala, Nila and Lakshmana 
accompanied that Rama.
Thereafter, fully covering a vast stretch of land, the great army of bears and monkeys, 
followed in the wake of Rama.
Monkeys, the annihilator of enemies, resembling elephants, took hold of mountain-peaks 
and hundreds of well-grown huge trees.
Those two brothers Rama and Lakshmana, the destroyers of their adversaries, reached the 
city of Lanka ruled by Ravana, in not a long time.
The monkeys, encouraged by the sound of Rama's voice and obedient to his command, halted 
before the city of Lanka, garlanded with banners, beautiful and splendid with pleasure-gardens, having 
an unusual rampart which is inaccessible with its elevated arched door-ways and invincible even by the 
celestials.
Reaching the city of Lanka ruled by Ravana, the heroic Rama the son of Dasaratha accompanied 
by Lakshmana, halted near the northern gate, where Ravana stayed. Who else but Rama is capable of protecting 
the army besieging that gate, regulated by Ravana, as an ocean, regulated by Varuna, guarded by awful 
demons on all sides and creating fear to the weak as a subterranean region is guarded by demons?
Rama saw various types and multitude of weapons and shields kept there by the warriors.
Nila, the valiant army-chief of monkeys together with Mainda and Dvivida reached and 
halted before the Eastern gate.
Angada of very mighty prowess, together with Rishhabha, Gavaksha, Gaja and Gavaya took 
charge of the Southern gate.
The strong monkey Hanuman together with Prajangha, Tarasa and other warriors, guarded 
the western gate.
Sugreeva, along with all the chiefs of monkeys equal to the strength of Garuda (the eagle 
and the vehicle of Vishnu) as well as Vayu the god of the wind, was stationed himself in the middle 
of the fort.
Thirty six crores of monkeys, highly renowned generals stood besiezed, where the monkey 
Sugreeva was there, having exerted pressure on the demons occupying that post.
Meanwhile, under Rama's command, Lakshmana along with Vibhishana distributed a crore 
each of his monkeys at each gate.
Behind Rama and not far from him, Sushena together with Jambavan, followed by a multitude 
of forces, stood at the intermediate post.
Those lions among the monkeys, possessing the teeth of tigers, taking hold of trees and 
rocks, waited delightedly for the signal to fight.
All of them were lashing their tails feverishly, using their jaws and nails as weapons, 
trembling in every limb and had their faces set grimly.
Some were having the strength of ten elephants, some a ten times of that and some were 
equal to the strength of a thousand elephants.
Some were having the strength of an ogha* of elephants. Some were endowed with a strength 
of ten times to that. some others there were chiefs of monkeys, having an immeasurable strength.
Marvellous and astonishing was the gathering of those troops of monkeys there, like a 
swarm of locusts.
By the monkeys who reached Lanka and by those stationed already beneath its walls, the 
air and earth seem to be completely filled.
A hundred divisions of one lakh each of bears and monkeys poured towards the gates of 
Lanka, while others proceeded to fight on every side.
Those monkeys covered the mountain on every side. A crore of them ranged round that city.
Even winds were unable to penetrate Lanka being surrounded on all sides by heroic monkeys 
holding tree trunks in their hands.
The demons, who in their valour equaled Indra the ruler of gods, seeing themselves besieged, 
as by clouds, were struck with sudden terror.
While the flock of monkey- troops was advancing there, a tremendous clamour arose, resembling 
a roar in the ocean beating against its shore.
By that great tumult, the entire Lanka with its ramparts arches, hills, woods and forests 
began to tremble.
That army of monkeys, guarded by Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva became even more invinceible 
than all the celestials and demons put together.
Having thus ranged his forces, with a view to destroy the demons, Rama who knew about 
the four expedients (to be used against an enemy in the shape of conciliation, gift, sowing dissension 
and punishment) employed in succession, took counsel again and again with his ministers and arrived 
at a decision. Calling to his mind the duty of the kings, Rama who was eager to undertake what was to 
be done next, in concurrence with Vibhishana, summoned Angada the son of Vali and spoke as follows:
"Go my gentle Angada on my behalf and, passing thought the city of Lanka without fear 
and anxiety and Lanka without fear and anxiety and approaching Ravana - the unfortunate demon devoid 
of sovereignty and who has lost his splendour because of his inclination to die - admonish him in the 
following words:"
"O, Ravana the Ranger of the Night! In your reckless arrogance, sages, celestials, celestial 
musicians and their wives, serpent - demons, yakshas the semi-divine beings and kings have been oppressed 
by you. From now on, that arrogance, born of the boon you received from Brahma the Lord of creation, 
shall be subdued."
"I shall inflict a fitting penalty for your ruthless abduction of my consort. I am stationed 
myself at the gate of Lanka, with a Rod of chastisement."
"O, demon! Slain by me, you will attain the region of Gods, of all the great sages and 
all the royal sages."
"O, the worst demon! Demonstrate the same courage and magic that you did employ in bearing 
Seetha away from me."
"If you do not make an appeal to my clemency by returning Seetha, I shall make this world 
devoid of all demons."
"This pious minded Vibhishana, the foremost of demons has come to me. Surely, this illustrious 
demon will obtain the kingdom of Lanka, which will henceforth be free from troubles."
"You, without a knowledge of the self and a sinful demon having stupid followers around 
you, cannot indeed enjoy the kingdom even for a moment, by this unrighteousness."
"O, demon! Otherwise, get ready for a battle, by gathering courage and laying hold of 
your valour. Having been slain by my arrows in combat, you will be laid in peace.
"O, Ranger of the Night! Even if you range the three worlds in the forms of a bird, you 
will not return alive, when you come into my range of sight."
"I give you this salutary counsel prepare for your obsequies. Let Lanka be obliged to 
be seen well by you (like your last sight), as your survival is in my hands."
Hearing the words of Rama, who was unwearied in action, Angada the son of Tara, leapt 
into air like a god of fire personified and marched ahead.
Reaching Ravana's palace in an instant, the illustrious Angada saw Ravana, seated coolly 
along with his ministers.
Angada, the foremost of the monkeys, wearing golden bracelets, descended close to the 
king and stood there like a flaming torch.
Having made himself known, Angada communicated, that whole of the excellent speech of 
Rama without adding or subtracting anything to Ravana in the presence of Ravana's ministers, saying:
"I am the son of Vali, Angada by name. I have come as a messenger for the king of Koshala, 
Rama of imperishable exploits. Has my name ever reached your ears?"
"Rama who is born in Raghu dynasty and who augements the joy of Kausalya speaks thus 
to you, �O, ruthless demon! Come forth and enter into combat. Prove to be the representative of your 
race!' "
" �I shall kill you along with your ministers, sons, cousins and other relatives. You 
being dead, all the three worlds will be rid of fear.'"
" �Now, I shall uproot you, a thorn to sages and an enemy to celestials, demons, semi-divine 
beings, celestial musicians, serpent-gods and ogres'."
"If you do not restore Seetha honourably, by bowing respectfully before me, you are slain 
and Vibhishana will become the king.'"
Hearing these harsh words from Angada the lion among the monkeys, Ravana the Lord of 
the demon-tribe was infuriated.
Then, the enraged Ravana repeatedly commanded his attendants, saying: "Let this stupid 
monkey be seized and put to death."
Hearing Ravana's words, four terrible demons seized Angada who, in his splendour, resembled 
a blazing torch.
Then, the prudent and heroic Angada the son of Tara voluntarily allowed himself to be 
seized, in order to display his prowess before the host of demons.
Then, seizing like unto birds those attendants clung to his arms, Angada leapt on to 
the palace that resembled like a mountain.
All those four demons were shaken out by Angada's impetuous leap and fell on the ground 
there under the eyes of their king.
Thereafter, the glorious Angada the son of Vali ascended the roof of Ravana's palace, 
which equaled the summit of a mountain in height.
That roof of the palace, trampled by Angada, crumbled - as a peak of Himalayan range 
was shattered long ago by lightening - before Ravana's gaze.
After destroying the roof of the palace, Angada proclaimed his name and with a triumphant 
roar, rose into the air.
Causing restlessness to all the demons but delight to the monkeys, Angada approached 
close to Rama, who was stationed in the middle of the monkey-forces.
Because of the destruction of his palace, Ravana on his part got extremely angry. Foreseeing 
his own destruction, he became a desponded demon.
Surrounded by many monkeys, roaring with delight, Rama on his part was proceeding ahead 
already for the battle, with an intent to wipe out the enemy.
Now, Sushena the highly valiant monkey, was stationed there like the head of the mountain 
surrounded by innumerable monkeys, who were bale to change their form at will.
Under the order of Sugreeva, the invincible monkey, Sushena was patrolling the gates 
and wandering like a moon among the stars.
Seeing hundreds of divisions of those monkeys encamped under the walls of Lanka, marshaled 
on the shores of the sea, the demons were amazed and some others were terror-struck while others, overjoyed 
at the prospect of fighting, leapt even in exultation.
Those miserable demons saw the entire extensive space between the walls and the moat 
being occupied by the monkeys, like unto a second rampart. The demons cried out, "Woe! Alas!" in panic.
As a result of that appalling tumult in the capital city of the demons, the soldiers 
of Ravana seized hold of their great weapons and sallied forth like the winds that blow at the dissolution 
of the worlds.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Indrajit, the demon, who was endowed with extraordinary energy, standing on the
ground his horses having been killed; was very much enraged and blazed with spirit.

Those two warriors, holding their bows, having an extreme intent to kill each other
with their arrows, were like two excellent elephants going out in the forest for the purpose of
conquering one over the other.

Those demons and monkeys, rushing from all sides, destroying each other, did not
desert their masters in battle.

Applauding and causing rejoice to all the demons and even feeling delighted himself,
Indrajit then spoke the following words:

"These quarters are wrapped on all sides with abundant darkness. O foremost of
demons! It can not be identified at this time whether one belongs to one's own army or an
enemy.

"You courageously fight, so as to stupefy the monkeys. I, on my part, will return to
the battle-field, ascending another chariot."

"You act in such a way so that these evil-minded monkeys do not carry on their fight
(with me) while enter the city."

Thus speaking, Indrajit the annihilator of enemies, having deceived the monkeys,
entered the City of Lanka for the sake of getting anther chariot.

Arranging for embellishment of a chariot, which was beautiful, decked with gold,
furnished with darts, swords and arrows, yoked with excellent horses, directed by a charioteer who
could understand those horses properly and could give credible instructions to them, that Indrajit,
a conqueror in battle, who was endowed with extraordinary energy, then ascended it.

That valiant Indrajit, surrounded by troops of principal demons and incited by the
force of destiny, sallied forth from the city.

Moving out form the City with his swift horses, that indrajit, the destroyer of
valiant enemies, attacked Lakshmana and Vibhishana.

Seeing Idnrajit seated in the chariot, Lakshmana, the mighty monkeys and Vibhishana
the demon then were very much surprised on recalling the alacrity of the intelligent Indrajit.

The enraged Indrajit also struck down hundreds and thousands of monkey-chiefs by
using a multitude of arrows in the battle-field.

Stretching his bow to a circle, that enraged Indrajit the conqueror in battle,
exhibiting supreme agility, began to kill the monkeys.

Thus being killed by steel arrows, those monkeys of terrible prowess sought refuge
in Lakshmana, as people would take refuge in Brahma the Lord of Creation.

Then, blazing with hostile anger, Lakshmana, showing his agility of hand, tore
Indrajit's bow.

Hurriedly, he took another bow and made it ready. Lakshmana tore that bow too of
Indrajit with three arrows.

Thereupon, Lakshmana struck that Indrajit, whose bow was torn, on his chest with
five arrows which were deadly like a serpentine poison.

Those arrows, released from that great bow, penetrating through Indrajit's body,
fell to the ground like huge red serpents.

Ejecting blood from his month, that Indrajit, who had his bow torn, took hold of his
excellent bow with the bow-string firmly fastened and which was stronger than the earlier bow.

Employing utmost agility, Indrajit, aiming at Lakshmana, streamed forth a shower of
arrows, as Indra the lord of celestials streaming forth the rain.

Lakshmana the annihilator of enemies coolly warded off the shower of arrows released
by Indrajit, though it was most difficult to resist.

Lakshmana with great splendor, remaining unperplexed, then showed his prowess to
Indrajit, which was marvelous indeed.

Getting extremely enraged, Lakshmana then pierced all those demons who stood in the
battle-field with three arrows each, showing his speed in discharging missiles and also struck
Indrajit with an array of arrows.

That Indrajit, who was struck by the enemy, who was mighty destroyer of enemies,
released several arrows unhindered towards Lakshmana.

Lakshmana, the destroyer of valiant adversaries, tore those arrows yet unarrived,
with sharp arrows. The virtuous Lakshmana eliminated the head of the charioteer of Indrajit, the
chariot-warrior, in the battle with an arrow called Bhalla which was looking curved at its
nodes.

Those horses, bereft of a charioteer there, without getting perturbed, ran up in a
circular fashion and continued to draw the chariot. The scene looked wonderful indeed.

Getting the power of anger, Lakshmana of unyielding prowess, pierced the horses of
Indrajit with arrows, so as to frighten them thereby.

Getting impatient with that act of Lakshmana in battle, Indrajit struck that enraged
Lakshmana with ten arrows.

Those arrows of Indrajit, equal to thunderbolts and deadly as serpentine poison,
having reached Lakshmana's armour with a golden hue, got destroyed.

Understanding Lakshmana to have been protected by an impenetrable armour and showing
his swiftness in discharging missiles, Indrajit the son of Ravana, who felt very much angered,
pierced Lakshmana in the forehead with three arrows provided with good plumes.

With those three arrows planted in his forehead, Lakshmana who was fond of fighting,
shone like a mountain with its three peaks, in the battle-field.

Thus tormented in battle by Indrajit the demon, that Lakshmana then quickly
stretching the bow, pierced him in return with five arrows, in battle, in Indrajit's face holding
beautiful ear-rings.

Lakshmana Indrajit, the heroes endowed with extraordinary might and armed with very
strong bows and possessing terrible prowess, struck each other with distinctly pointed arrows.

Those two warriors, Lakshmana and Indrajit, with both their bodies stained in blood,
shone in the battle-field at that time, like Kimshuka trees in blossom.

Those two archers, with their minds directed towards victory, met each other and
pierced their opponent in all limbs with dreadful arrows.

Then, Indrajit, filled with martial anger, struck Vibhishana in his auspicious face,
with three arrows.

Having struck Vibhishana, the leader of demons, with three arrows, Indrajit struck
all those monkey chiefs with a single arrow each.

Very much enraged with him, that Vibhishana of great splendor killed the horses of
that evil-minded Indrajit with his mace.

Just leaping down from the chariot whose charioteer was destroyed earlier and whose
horses were killed, that Indrajit of great splendor employed his javelin towards his maternal
uncle.

Seeing that Javelin rushing towards Vibhishana, Lakshmana tore it into ten pieces
with his sharp arrows and felled it on the floor.

The strong bodied Vibhishana, in anger, dug five arrows, whose impact was a hard as
that of a thunder-bolt, into the bosom of Indrajit, whose horses were already killed.

Having penetrated his body, those arrows which were provided with golden feathers,
went straight into their target, got stained with blood and appeared like red large serpents.

Enraged with his paternal uncle, that Indrajit, standing in the midst of demons,
took hold of an excellent arrow earlier presented by Yama the lord of Death.

Seeing that great arrow seized by him, Lakshmana also, of great splendor and
terrible prowess, took hold of another arrow.

That arrow had been presented to him, in the course of a dream, by Kubera the god of
riches, of immense glory himself, which was difficult to be conquered and much more difficult to be
tolerated even for gods and demons including Indra the lord of celestials.

Stretched with strength by their arms, which resembled a pair of steel rods, emitted
a piercing sound like that of a pair of curlew-cranes.

The excellent arrows fitted and pulled out from their excellent bow by those heroes,
blazed very much with splendour.

Those arrows, released from the bow, making the sky shine and hitting each other
face to face, collided each other powerfully.

The collision of those arrows of terrible form broke out a fierce fire comprising of
smoke and sparkles.

Hitting each other like two major planets, those two arrows in battle burst into a
hundred pieces and fell on the ground.

On seeing their arrows warded off in the battle-front, those two warriors, Lakshmana
and Indrajit then felt abashed and got provoked.

Getting excited, Lakshmana took hold of a missile presided over by Varuna (the god
of water). Skilled in warfare, the great Indrajit too discharged a missile presided over by Rudra
(the god of destruction) in battle.

By that Rudra missile, that very wonderful Varuna-missile was struck. Then, that
enraged Indrajit of great splendour and the conqueror of battle, looking like the destroyer of the
world, employed a missile presided over by Agni the god of fire which was blazing.

The valiant Lakshmana obstructed Agni-missile, by a missile presided over by the
sun-god. Finding his missile repelled, Indrajit was filled with anger and took hold of a sharp
arrow used by demons and capable of tearing down an enemy.

From that bow, blazing weapon similar to a hammer duly hidden, darts, fire arms,
maces, swords and axes rushed forth.

Seeing that terrible missile, which was very harsh, unrestrainable for all beings
and which can tear all weapons in battle, the brilliant Lakshmana obstructed that missile by using
Maheswara-missile.

There was a wonderful battle between both of them, causing hair to stand erect. The
beings in the sky surrounded Lakshmana.

Surrounded by many surprised beings in that terrible battle taking place between
monkeys and demons, yielding terrific noise, the sky sparkled.

Placing Indra the lord of celestials as their head, the sages, manes, gods,
Gandharvas the celestial musicians, eagles and serpents protected Lakshmana in the
battle-field.

Then, Lakshmana fitted another excellent arrow, which had a sensation of ignition
and which can tear down Indrajit.

The heroic Lakshmana fitted the arrow, having beautiful plumes, which consisted of
rounded parts, well-jointed, skillfully fashioned, decked with gold, capable of destroying the body
of the enemies, not difficult to keep off but difficult even to tolerate, a source of terror to the
demons as deadly as the venom of poisonous snakes and duly honoured by the host of gods.

With the help of that arrow, the highly powerful and valiant Indra, the lord of
celestials, who had green horses to his chariot, was able to conquer the demons in a combat which
raged between celestials and demons.

Fitting a missile presided over by Indra the lord of celestials, which had never
been defeated in battle, to his excellent bow and drawing it, the glorious Lakshmana addressed the
following prayer, which was intended to achieve his purpose:

"O my dear arrow! If Rama the son of Dasaratha has set his mind on virtue, keeps up
his promise and is second to none in his prowess, destroy this Indrajit."

Thus saying and drawing up to the ear the arrow, which went straight, the heroic
Lakshmana released it towards Indrajit.

75. tat mahat shiraH= that large head; raakShasatanuujasya= of Indrajit; bhinna
skandham= separated from his trunk; rudhirokShitam= and moistened with blood; dadR^ishe= appeared;
bhuumau= on the ground; tapaniiya nibham= shining like gold.

That large head of Indrajit, separated from his trunk and moistened with blood, was
seen on the ground, shining like gold.

Having been killed, that Indrajit then forthwith fell to the ground, along with his
armour and head-protector, with his bow shattered.

As Indrajit was killed, all those monkeys together with Vibhishana roared in
rejoice, as the celestials did, when Vritra the demon was killed.

Then, a shout of victory rose in the sky from the mouth of gods, great-souled sages,
Gandharvas the celestial musicians and the celestial nymphs.

Seeing him fallen, that great army of demons, being struck by monkeys shining with
victory, sought the quarters.

Abandoning their weapons, while being struck by the monkeys, those demons went
towards Lanka, running fast stupefied.

All those frightened demons, abandoning their weapons sharp-edged spears, swords and
axes ran away in hundreds to various directions.

Tormented by the monkeys, some were scared and entered Lanka. Some fell into the
ocean. Some took refuge in the mountain.

Seeing Indrajit killed and lying on the battle-field, not even one among the
thousands of demons was to be seen.

As the sun-rays do not exist when the sun has sunk below the horizon, so those
demons left to different directions when Indrajit had fallen.

Thrown asunder and dead, that long-armed Indrajit looked like the sun whose rays
have cooled down and like the fire which is extinguished.

When Indrajit was fallen, the world then had its oppressions pacified, now that its
enemy had been destroyed and it experience a rejoice.

While that demon of sinful deeds is having been killed, the illustrious Indra the
ruler of gods along with all the great sages were rejoiced.

In the sky too was heard the sound of large drums played by celestials, the melody
produced by dancing Apsaras the celestial nymphs and the songs of Gandharvas the celestial
musicians.

While that demon of cruel deeds was killed, a deluge of flowers rained along with
showers of praises. It was a wonderful scene.

While that Indrajit, who was the terror of all the worlds, had fallen, the waters
and the sky became clear. The celestials and demons were rejoiced and arrived on the scene.

The gratified celestials, Gandharvas the celestial musicians and the demons said:
"Let the Brahmanas move about cheerfully, now that their trouble has ceased."

Seeing that foremost among demons, who was unrivalled in battle, having been killed,
the rejoiced monkey-chiefs applauded Lakshmana.

Vibhishana, Hanuma and Jambavan the chief of bears were pleased at Lakshmana for his
victor and applauded him too.

The monkeys, who accomplished their aim, roaring, jumping with joy and emitting
thundering sounds, stood encircling Lakshmana.

Wagging their tails and lashing them, the monkeys then gave forth the slogan,
"Victorious is Lakshmana!"

Embracing each other with rejoiced minds, the monkeys indulged in good conversations
about Lakshmana and his manifold qualities.

Hearing Indrajit having been killed and witnessing that arduous act of Lakshmana,
their beloved friend in battle, the celestials were gratified and experienced a great rejoice in
their minds.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing those words of Lakshmana, that valiant Rama, the annihilator of his enemies,
taking hold of his bow, fixed an arrow on the bow-string.

In the forefront of battle, Rama released terrific arrows towards Ravana. Then,
occupying another chariot, Ravana the king of demons rushed towards Rama, even as Rahu the
seizer-demon rushes towards the sun.

Ravana for his part, standing in his chariot struck Rama with thunderbolt-like
arrows, as a cloud strikes gushes of rain on a huge mountain.

With an attentive mind, Rama showered golden decked arrows, looking like blazing
flames of fire, on Ravana in the battle-field.

The gods, celestial musicians and kinnaras the mythical beings thought that the
battle was not equal between Rama standing on the ground and Ravana fighting from a chariot.

Hearing their nectar-like words, the illustrious Indra, the chief f celestials then
called Matali and spoke as follows:

"Go quickly with my chariot to Rama, who is standing on the earth. After reaching
the earth, invite him to take his seat in the chariot and carry out a great service to the
gods."

Hearing the words of Indra, Matali, the charioteer of Indra, offering salutation to
him by bowing his head, spoke then the following words:

"O Indra! Providing with green horses the excellent chariot, I will proceed then
immediately and perform the duty of a charioteer to Rama."

Then came the glorious and excellent chariot of Indra, having variegated body decked
in gold, which was fitted with hundreds of tiny bells, with its pole of cat's eye gems shone like
the morning sun, yoked to excellent green horses, having golden chaplets on their heads, having
white whisks, covered with nets of gold, shining like the sun and bearing a flag-staff raised on a
golden bamboo. Ascending the chariot, as enjoined by Indra and descending from paradise, Matali
approached Rama.

Then Matali, the charioteer of Indra, along with a whip in his hand, stayed in the
chariot itself and joining his palms in salutation, spoke the following words to Rama.

"Indra has sent this chariot to you for your victory, O the mighty and the glorious
Rama, the destroyer of adversaries!"

"Here is the great bow belonging to Indra, an armour shining as fire, some arrows as
bright as sun and a stainless auspicious spear."

"O heroic king! Mounting this chariot with me as a charioteer, kill Ravana the king,
as earlier Indra the lord of celestials killed the demons."

Duly circumambulating that chariot (as a mark of respect) and offering his
salutation, when thus spoken by Matali, Rama then ascended the chariot, causing the three worlds to
shine forth with his splendour.

Then ensued a tumultuous and thrilling battle, between the great armed Rama and
Ravana, the demon.

That Rama, who was skilled in the use of great missiles, struck the missile presided
over by Gandharvas and the missile presided over by gods, by means of missiles of the same
type.

Ravana, the king of demons was very much enraged and again released another
extra-ordinarily terrific missile presided over by demons.

Those arrows, decked with gold, discharged from Ravana's bow, turning as they were
into highly poisonous snakes and rolled towards Rama.

With flaming mouths wide open and vomiting blazing fire, those dreadful snake-like
arrows dashed towards Rama alone.

All the quarters stood covered by highly poisonous serpents, whose impact was as
hard as that of Vasuki (the king of serpents), with the flaming coils. Even the corners between the
quarters stood enveloped by them.

Seeing those serpents rushing towards him in the battle-field, Rama released the
terrific and dangerous missile presided over by Garuda the eagle (an enemy of serpents).

With golden shafts which shone like flames, discharged by Rama's bow turning into
golden eagles (the enemies of serpents) those arrows flew all around.

Those arrows of Rama, which can assume any form at will, appeared in the form of
eagles and destroyed all those arrows, which flew with a great speed in the form of snakes.

Enraged on his missile having been frustrated by Rama, Ravana streamed forth
terrific showers of arrows on Rama.

Tormenting Rama of unwearied action with thousand arrows, Ravana then pierced Matali
with a multitude of arrows.

Targeting with only one arrow, Ravana tore off the flag-staff. Striking down the
golden flag-staff from the top of the chariot down to the seat of the chariot, Ravana struck even
Indra's horses with a multitude of arrows.

Seeing Rama afflicted, the gods, Gandharvas the celestial musicians, Charanas the
celestials bards along with the demons, as also Siddhas the demi-gods and the great sages felt
dejected. Seeing the moon in the shape of Rama eclipsed by Rahu in the shape of Ravana, the
monkey-chiefs too, along with Vibhishana, felt perturbed.

Seeing thus the moon in the shape of Rama eclipsed by the planet Rahu in the shape
of Ravana, the planet Mercury stood, assailing the constellation Rohini presided over by the god
Prajapati (the lord of creation), the beloved of the moon the heavenly body and spelling disaster
to all created beings.

Blazing as it were in fury, the ocean rose high at that time, as though it was going
to touch the sun, its mist-wreathed waves moving to-and-fro.

The sun, looking ashy in colour assuming a piercing aspect, and its rays grown
exhilarated, appeared in a headless trunk in its lap and united with a comet.

The planet Mars stood assailing in the sky, the constellation Vishakha, presided
over by the gods Indra and Agni (the god of fire), which is adorned by the kings of Kosala.

That Ravana, having ten faces and twenty arms, holding a bow tightly in his hands,
looked like Mount Mainaka.

Being overwhelmed by Ravana the demon in the battle-front, Rama could not fit his
arrows to his bow.

The enraged Rama, knitting his eye-brows and with his eyes turned slightly
blood-red, was provoked to fierce anger, as though he would burn out the demons.

Seeing the face of the sagacious Rama getting provoked of anger, all the living
beings got frightened. The earth too began to tremble.

The mountain, with lions, tigers and swaying trees, was trembled. Even the ocean,
the lord of rivers, became agitated.

Dense clouds, emitting harsh sounds and assuming a stern aspect, roamed all over in
the sky, thundering.

Seeing the very much enraged Rama and also the terrific portents, all the living
beings were frightened. Fear seized Ravana too.

Seated in their aerial cars, gods, Gandharvas the celestial musicians, great Nagas
(semi divine beings having the face of a man and the tail of a serpent), the sages, demons, giants
and those eagles remaining in the air, saw then the battle of two heroes, fighting steadily with
various dreadful weapons and looking like the final dissolution of the world.

Getting rejoiced on observing that great battle, all the gods and demons who had
come to witness the conflict at that time, responded:

The demons who reached there cried out to Ravana, "Be victorious!". Those gods
called to Rama saying again and again: "Be you victorious!".

In the meantime, that evil-minded Ravana, who caused enemies to cry, stroking with
anger a great weapon wishing to strike Rama, took hold off with fury, a spike, which was powerful
as a thunderbolt, which made a loud noise (when hurled at a target), capable of exterminating all
enemies, resembling the mountain-peaks, which with its sharp points dreadful to conceive and to
behold, resembling a smoke-crested mass of fire blazing at the end of the world-cycle, exceedingly
furious, which was difficult to approach even for Death, which was unassailable, which was a terror
for all beings, capable as it was of tearing and splitting them and blazing as it was.

That valiant Ravana, surrounded by warriors of demons in battle, was very much
enraged and took hold of that spear at its middle.

With blood-red eyes in anger, Ravana with his collossal body, duly raising the spear
and bringing rejoice to his own army, roared terribly in battle.

The terrific noise made by Ravana then trembled the earth, the sky, the four
quarters and the angles of the compass

By that roar of that evil-minded Ravana of a collossal body, all the living beings
were frightened. The ocean too got agitated.

Taking hold of that large spear, that Ravana of great prowess, emitting a very loud
roar, spoke the following harsh words to Rama:

"Raised in fury by me, O Rama! This spear with the power of a thunder-bolt, will
take away surely your life along with the life of your bother, your help-mate."

"Killing you with my strength now, I, who always commend war-fare, will make you
level with the valiant demons, who have been killed in the battle-front."

"Wait, I will kill you with the spear now, O Rama!" Saying so, that demon hurled
that spear.

That spear, wreathed as it was in a circle of lightning, provided as it was with
eight bells and making a loud noise, released from Ravana's hand, splashed, as it went into tehs
sky.

Seeing that blazing spear of terrible appearance, the valiant Rama who was born in
Raghu dynasty, having stretched his bow, released the arrows.

With streams of arrows, Rama warded off that spear, which was rushing upon him, as
with streams of water, Indra the lord of celestials warded off the fire shooting up at the time of
dissolution of the world.

That large spear of Ravana consumed those arrows coming forth from Rama's bow, as
fire would consume the moths.

Seeing those arrows smashed by coming into contact with the spear and reduced to
ashes even while positioned in the sky, Rama was seized with fury.

That Rama, the delight of Raghus, was quite enraged and took hold of that spear
brought by Matali the charioteer, as desired by Indra the lord of celestials.

That spear, lifted up by the powerful Rama, which was rendered resonated by the
bells, began to blaze like a blazing meteor at the time of the dissolution of the world.

That spear, hurled by Rama, fell on that Ravana's spear. Torn down by Rama's spear,
the large spear of Ravana fell on the ground, with its lustre extinguished.

With terrific arrows of high speed, with their shafts made of reeds, going straight
to their target, Rama pierced the exceedingly fleet horses of Ravana.

With his sharp arrows, Rama then pierced the chest-region of Ravana. He also struck,
quite deliberately, the forehead of Ravana with three arrows.

With all his limbs torn down by arrows and with blood flowing from his limbs, that
Ravana in the midst of demons, shone like a blooming Ashoka tree in the midst of a multitude of
trees.

With his limbs severely injured by Rama's arrows and with his body bathed in blood,
that Ravana felt exhausted in the middle of a multitude of demons and gave went to a violent anger
at that time.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Returning to the City of Lanka, Ravana the King of Demons was afflicted with the
fear of Rama's arrows, his pride was humbled and his senses troubled.

The king was overcome by the high-souled Rama, like an elephant is by a lion or a
serpent by an eagle.

The Lord of Demons was maddened in recollecting Rama's arrows resembling the Rod of
Brahma the Lord of creation and possessed of the splendour of lightning.

Resting on an excellent and charming throne made of gold, Ravana looked at the
demons and spoke the following words:

"All that great penance performed by me became a waste indeed, for, I who am equal
to Mahendra the Lord of Celestials have been defeated by a mere man!"

"The terrible words of Brahma the Lord of Creation saying, 'You know of the threat
from men' appear true. That is so."

"I sought immunity from death at the hands of celestials, titans or celestials
musicians, or semi divine beings or demons or serpent-demons, but f man I made no mention."

"Rama the son of Dasaratha is the man I think of whom Anaranya born of Ikshvaku
dynasty formerly spoke, saying: 'O, the worst of demons, the worst of your race and the wretched
one! In my race will be born a man who will slay you in battle with your sons, ministers, army,
horses and charioteer."

"Further, I was formerly cursed by Vedavati when she was humiliated by me. The same
Vedavati is born as the highly fortunate Seetha the daughter of Janaka."

"What was predicted by Parvati the consort of Shiva, Nandishvara the attendant of
Shiva, Rambha the wife of Nalakubara and Punjikasthala the daughter of Varunda has come to pass!
The words of the sages never prove false."

"On account of all this and admitting it, you should exert yourselves to the
uttermost. Let the demons go to the summit of Charya Mountain."

"Awaken that kumbhakarna, who is without equal in prowess, who humbles the pride of
the celestials and demons, and on whom the curse of Brahma the Lord of creation rests."

Having known that Prahasta being slain and knowing himself to have been defeated in
the battle, Ravana issued his commands tot he dreadful army, saying:

"Guard the gates with utmost care. Man the ramparts. Rouse Kumbhakarna who is
slumbering soundly."

"Kumbhakarna is sleeping happily, his understanding vitiated by lust and free from
all anxieties. The demon sleeps for nine, seven, ten or eight months.

"Having deliberated with me nine days ago, he has since fallen asleep. Awaken
quickly that mighty Kumbhakarna."

"The mighty armed Kumbhakarna, the foremost of all demons will kill the monkeys and
the two princes at once in the battle."

"This Kumbhakarna, the chief among all the demons and a great mark in the battle,
being fond of a rustic comfort, is always sleeping stupidly."

"If Kumbhakarna is awaken, there will be no worry for me, who stand defeated by Rama
in this highly terrific battle."

"What is the use of him, who possessing a strength equal to that of Indra the Lord
of celestials, cannot help me in such a dreadful catastrophe?"

Hearing those words of Ravana, those demons very briskly went to the abode of
Kumbhakarna.

Entering the beautiful cave of Kumbhakarna, with a large door, having an area of a
Yojana on all sides and bearing a floral perfume, the demons of mighty strength, though shaken off
by Kumbhakarna's breaths, remained stable forcefully with difficulty and went into the cave.

Entering that beautiful cave inlaid with diamonds and gold, those tigers among
demons beheld Kumbhakarna, of terrific prowess, who was sleeping.

They together tried to awaken Kumbhakarna who was sleeping nastily like a spread-out
mountain in a great slumber.

His limbs covered with down which stood on end, breathing like a serpent, as he
slept, Kumbhakarna of irresistible valour emitted dreadful snores, his nostrils being horrible, and
his mouth a gaping hell. Stretched to his full length on the earth, he gave forth an odour of
marrow and blood, his limbs were adorned with golden armlets and he wore a diadem as bright as the
sun, thus did that lion among demons, Kumbhakarna, the slayer of his foes, appear!

Then, those powerful demons, in order to satisfy him, placed a heap of venison as
high as Mount Meru, in front of Kumbhakarna.

Those excellent demons piled up a great mass of wonderful food with the meat of
deers, buffaloes and pigs.

Then, the demons placed pots of blood and various kinds of meat in front of
Kumbhakarna.

They rubbed Kumbhakarna the scourge of his foes with the most rare sandalwood and
refreshed him with celestial and fragrant garlands as well as sweet-smelling perfumes.

They burnt incenses and hymned the praises of that warrior who proved fatal to his
foes. They cried out noises which burst forth on every side like thunder.

They blew couches which were as bright as the moon and with impatience, made with
impatience, made sounds tumultuously all at once.

Those demons made sounds by clapping their hands, in order to awaken Kumbhakarna and
shook him too, creating a great clamour.

The birds passing through the sky ran helter-shelter and fell down soon on hearing
the sounds of the couches, drums, gongs, clapping of hands and leonine roars.

As the illustrious Kumbhakarna did not waken from his slumber despite those great
sounds, all troops of demons seized hold of bars, pestles and maces towards him.

Then, the cruel demons struck that sleeping Kumbhakarna on his chest with
mountain-tops, pestles, maces, hammers and their fists.

Even with all their strength, the demons could not stand upright before the
breathing winds of Kumbhakarna, the demon.

Then, the terribly strong demons firmly seated themselves round him and began to
beat drums, cymbals, kettle-drums and myriads of couches and trumpets.

Ten thousand demons surrounded him all at once. Beating that colossus who resembled
a heap of antimony, the demons on their part tried to rouse him by making sounds. Even then, he did
not wake.

As they were unable to rouse him by these means, they resorted to more energetic and
ruthless methods.

They beat horses, camels, donkeys, and elephants with sticks whips and thongs, so
that they trample upon him and blasted kettle-drums, couches and drums.

They crushed his limbs under piles of heavy logs and pillars, as also maces lifted
with all their strength.

The entire Lanka, with its mountain and groves, was filled with great noise. He
nevertheless did not wake.

Then, they beat a thousand drums all around with sticks of refined gold.

Yet, as he did not wake from his profound slumber, being under the spell of a curse,
the demons were enraged.

All those demons of terrible strength were filled with a great fury. Some others
assembled their strength to awaken that demon.

Some beat drums, some shouted, some tore out his hair and some others bit his
ears.

Some poured hundreds of pitchers of water into his ears but Kumbhakarna, plunged in
deep sleep, did not stir.

Some strong ones, armed with rocks and hammers, struck the rocks and hammers on his
head, chest and other limbs.

Though smitten by missiles fastened with ropes on all sides, the giant bodied demon
did not wake.

A thousand elephants ran up and down on his body till Kumbhakarna lightly woke up
and became aware of the pressure.

Being insensible to those violent blows of crags and trees hurled upon him, but
under the prompting of extreme hunger, Kumbhakarna suddenly sprang up from sleep, yawning due to
loss of sleep.

Waving his arms resembling serpent's coils or the peaks of mountains, hard as cut
diamonds, that demons opening his monstrous month like unto the face of a submarine fire,
yawned.

His mouth yawning horribly resembled hell and appeared like the sun rising under the
high peak of Meru Mountain.

That mighty demon, being awake, yawned, heaving a sigh, like unto a tempest arising
from a mountain.

That figure of Kumbhakarna, rising up, stood out resembling Time at the dissolution
of the world, prepared to devour all beings.

His huge eyes, resembling flames of fire, with a glitter equal to that of lightning,
appeared like great blazing planets.

Then, the demons pointed to various kinds of victuals, boar and buffalo. The mighty
Kumbhakarna devoured them.

Then, the hungry Kumbhakarna, the enemy of Indra, ate the meat and being thirsty
drank the blood and gulped pitchers full of fat and wine.

Thereupon, knowing that Kumbhakarna was gratified of his hunger, the demons
approached him, saluting him with their heads bent and surrounded him on all sides.

Raising his eyelids that were heavy with sleep, his gaze still veiled, he directed
his glance towards those demons and spoke as follows:

That excellent demons kindly addressing all the demons and surprised at being
roused, spoke the following words to the demons:

"For what reason have you thus wakened me so suddenly? Is all well with the king or
anything in peril here?"

"Surely, there must be some great danger from an external source since you have
wakened me in haste."

"Now, I shall drive away the misfortune from Ravana the King of Demons, even if I
have to cut Mahendra himself to pieces or to freeze the Fire.

"For a petty reason, one does not indeed awaken, one such as I, from my slumber.
Hence, tell me frankly, for what reason you have roused me."

Yupaksha, a minister of the King, with his hands joined salutation, spoke (as
follows) to Kumbhakarna, the annihilator of his enemies, thus talking excitedly.

"O, Prince! There is no threat whatsoever at anytime for us from celestials but a
mere man is driving us back by a tumultuous tremor."

"O, Prince! It is not indeed the celestials or demons who have put us in such a
peril as it comes to us from a man."

"Monkeys, whose forms are as large as mountains, are besieging Lanka. There is a
tumultuous peril for us from Rama, who is furious on account of Seetha's abduction."

"Already, a single monkey set fire to our great city of slew the youthful Prince
Aksha with his escort of elephants and retinue."

" ' Get thee hence' were the words addressed by Rama who is equal to the sun in
splendour, to Ravana in person the Lord of Demons and the trouble-some person to celestials."

"That which this king never suffered at the hands of Gods or Demons or Danavas, he
has had to endure here from Rama, who released him from the danger to his life."

Hearing about the humiliation of his brother in the battle through the words of
Yupaksha, Kumbhakarna rolling his great eyes, spoke to Yupaksha (as follows):

"O, Yupaksha! Now itself, after conquering the entire army of monkeys with Lakshmana
and Rama on the battle-field, then only I shall see Ravana."

"I shall satiate the demons with the flesh and blood of monkeys and, as for Rama and
Lakshmana, I shall drink their blood myself."

Hearing these haughty from that demon, whose anger increased his ferocity, Mahodara
the chief of warriors of demons, having offered obeisance with joined palms, spoke the following
words:

"O, the mighty armed! When you have listened to the words of Ravana and considered
the advantages and disadvantages of the matter, even afterwards you can conquer the enemies in
battle."

Hearing the words of Mahodara, the might Kumbhakarna of great valour prepared to
depart, surrounded by demons.

The demons, having awaken that sleeping Kumbhakarna of dreadful eyes, form and
valour, went to the King's palace in haste.

All those demons, approaching Ravana who was seated on the throne, said to him with
joined palms, as follows:

"O, Lord of Demons! Kumbhakarna, your brother, has wakened. Is it your will that he
should enter the battle field from there itself or do you desire him to come here and see you?"

Ravana answered those demons who stood before him and with a glad heart, said: "I
want to see him here. Bring him after extending the honours due to him in a befitting manner."

Uttering "Be it so", all those demons as commanded by Ravana, returned to
Kumbhakarna and spoke the following words:

"The king, the lion of all the demons, desires to see you. Go and gratify your
brother!"

Hearing his brother's wish, Kumbhakarna the inviolable demon of great prowess,
uttering "so be it", leapt up from his couch.

Washing his face and bathing, refreshed and delighted, adorning himself well and
feeling thirsty, he hastened them to bring him a drink which can boost up his strength.

Thereupon, those demons brought him quickly the wine and various kinds of eatable
there, in their hurry to take Kumbhakarna with them as per Ravana's commands.

Having drunk two thousand pitchers, Kumbhakarna prepared to set out and slightly
inebriated and flushed, he was exhilarated and filled with energy.

The fuming Kumbhakarna, going to his brother's palace along with the army of demons,
appeared like Yama the Lord of Death at the end of all-destroying Time. He caused the earth to
tremble with his foot-steps, while marching.

The royal high way was illumined by his body, like unto that orb of a thousand rays
(the sun) by its flashes illumines the earth and he went there, surrounded by a circle of demons
paying obeisance, resembling Indra the Lord of Celestials approaching the abode of Brahma the Lord
of Creation.

Seeing that slayer of his foes on the royal high way, that monster as high as the
peak of a mountain, those monkeys stationed outside the city, as also their leaders, were
frightened suddenly.

Some gained refuge in Rama who affords protection, some fell down tottering, some
fled away perturbed in all directions and some others lay on the ground, confounded with fear.

Seeing that colossus appearing like a great peak, having a diadem who seemed to
touch the sun with his brilliance, the monkeys were seized with terror and had grown immensely in
size, fled hither and thither.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the words of the evil-minded Ravana, who was thus lamenting, as he was
overcome with grief, Trishira (one of his sons) spoke as follows:

"Truly in such a manner, the highly valiant Kumbhakarna, (the middle of our father
and uncles) has been killed. But good persons like you do not lament as you are doing, O king!"

"O Lord! You are capable of conquering even the three worlds. Why are you, as such,
lamenting about yourself, as a common person?"

"You do continue to have a javelin given by Brahma, an armour, a bow and an arrow
together with a chariot yoked to a thousand donkeys, emitting a sound resembling the rumbling of a
cloud."

"The celestials and giants were indeed destroyed several times by you with your
various types of weapons. As such, you can punish Rama, when endowed with all weapons."

"You stay on, O monarch! I will set out and eradicate your enemies in battle, as
Garuda the eagle eradicates the serpents."

"Beaten down by me, as Shambara by Indra and Naraka* by Vishnu, I will lay down Rama
today in battle."

Hearing the words of Trishira, Ravana the king of demons considered himself as
though born anew, after being summoned by Death.

Hearing the words of Trishira, Devantaka, Narantaka and the energetic Atikaya were
rejoiced of war.

Then, the brave Ravana's sons, whose prowess was equal to Indra and the foremost of
demons, roared asserting their superiority saying "I will lead, I will lead!"

All of them wee capable of passing through the sky. All were skilled in magic. All
had humbled the pride of gods. All were fierce in battle.

All were endowed with great strength. All were widely renowned. All were such as had
never been heard of having been conquered by celestials or Gandharvas or Kinnaras or large serpents
while encountering a battle.

All the demons were valiant ones, well-versed in weaponry. All were skilled in
war-fare. All were greatly knowledgeable and all had obtained boons.

That Ravana the king, surrounded by his sons, who were radiant as the sun and who
tormented the strength and fortune of the enemies, shone like Indra surrounded by celestials who
can destroy the pride of gigantic demons.

Embracing his sons, embellishing them with ornaments and blessing them profusely,
Ravana sent them to battle.

For the defense of his sons, Ravana sent Yuddhonmatta and Matta (better known as
Mahodara and Mahaparshva), his brothers to the battle.

Those demons with colossal bodies, paid obeisance (by circumambulating) to Ravana
(who caused the people to cry in terror) and departed.

Anointing their bodies with all types of herbs and perfumes, those six mighty and
excellent demons went away, eager to fight.

Trishira, Atikaya, Devantaka, Narantaka, Mahodara and Mahaparshva, under the clout
of destiny; set out for the battle.

Thereupon, Mahodara mounted an elephant called Sudarshana, like unto a dark-cloud
and born in Airavata-race.

That Mahodara, adorned with quivers, endowed with all types of armoury and mounting
the elephant, shone like the sun on the peak of Ashtachala mountain.

Trishira, the son of Ravana, ascended an exquisite chariot, yoked to excellent
horses and filled with all types of armoury.

Trishira, wielding a bow and mounting the chariot, shone like a cloud with
glittering meteors, illuminations and a rain-bow.

That Trishira with three diadems in that exquisite chariot, stood out like Mount
Himavat, the king of mountains with its three golden hills.

Then, Atikaya, having very fiery energy, the son of Ravana and the foremost among
the wielders of bow, mounted an excellent chariot.

Atikaya mounted that chariot, having first-rate wheels and axles, well-yoked, having
a good carriage and pole, filled with quivers and bows and flashingly full of missiles, swords and
maces.

He was radiant with his diadem, shining in brilliant gold and other ornaments, like
Mount Meru, causing to shine with its splendours (by the sun).

In that chariot, Atikaya that mighty prince, surrounded by the foremost of demons,
shone like Indra surrounded by celestials.

Narantaka mounted a white gigantic horse, similar to Uchchaishrava (the mount of
Indra), adorned with gold ornaments and as swift as thought.

Narantaka, holding a javelin, which was resplendent like a meteor, appeared shining,
like Guha (the offspring of Shiva) holding a spear and riding a beautiful peacock.

Devantaka, holding a glided iron-bar, marched ahead, resembling an incarnation of
Vishnu holding Mandara-mountain in his arms.

Mahaparshva, possessing a great splendour and vigour and wielding a mace in his arm
in battle, looked like Kubera the lord of wealth.

Those distinguished demons set out from. Lanka, like the gods leaving Amaravati.
Mighty demons, holding excellent weaponry, accompanied them, mounting on elephants, horses and
chariots making sounds of rumbling clouds.

Those mighty princes, having sun's brilliance, wearing diadems and possessed of
prosperity, shone like glowing planets in the sky.

The row of auspicious attire worn by them, shone like an autumnal cloud or like a
flock of cranes in the sky.

Determined either to die or to vanquish their enemies, those valiant demons went
forward, thus making their courageous resolve, eager to fight.

Those mighty demons set out with a mad conception of war, roared and made a
reverberatory sound, took up arrows and dispatched them.

The earth trembled as it were, by their battle-cries and clapping of arms. The sky
appeared breached, by the lion's roars of the demons.

Those mighty leaders of demons, having set out, were delighted to see the army of
monkeys having uplifted rocks as their weapons.

The mighty monkeys too saw that army of demons, which appeared like a black cloud
but blazing like fire and sun on all sides, abounding with elephants, horses and chariots, made to
resound with hundreds of small bells and wielding well-raised great weaponry.

Seeing that army which arrived and as they got the target for their fight, the
monkeys, having the great mountains uplifted, roared again and again. The monkeys, not tolerating
the demons, thus shouted, standing opposite to them.

Hearing the enhanced noise of the leaders of the army of monkeys, the troops of
demons who were terrible in might, not tolerating the rejoice of the enemies, then made a noise
more terribly.

Entering that terrific army of demons, those monkey-leaders, with their raised
mountains, roamed about like mountains with their peaks.

Some monkeys entering the sky and some others enraged, staying on earth with trees
and rocks as their weapons, wandered among the army of demons.

The foremost among the monkeys, holding trees, having extensive branches, roamed
about in the battle-field. That battle-front, filled with demons and monkeys, looked terrific.

Those monkeys, of terrific prowess, though impeded by a flood of arrows, initiated a
matchless rain of trees, rocks and mountains.

In the battle, the demons and the monkeys made a noise of lion's roars. The monkeys
pounded the demons with rocks.

The enraged monkeys killed demons wearing armours and ornaments. Some killed valiant
demons, sitting or standing in chariots and also those demons mounted on elephants and horses.

Valiant monkeys struck the demons vehemently. Those foremost of demons trembled, as
their bodies were attacked by mountain-peaks and blows of fists, down and roared.

Those demons also pierced the foremost of monkeys with sharp arrows, striking them
with spears mallets, swords, javelins and lances.

There, the monkeys and demons having their limbs smeared with the blood of their
foes, mowed each other with a desire to conquer each other.

Thereupon, within an instant, the battle-field became dampened with blood and
covered by the mountains and swords thrown by the monkeys and demons.

Then the battle-field became filled with dead bodies of demons, who had an ardent
passion for battle, having their colossal bodies devastated and scattered all over.

The demons, already thrown down and still being thrown down, with their spears
broken by the monkeys at that time, approached the monkeys and carried out a wonderful combat with
their limbs, arms and legs.

Those foremost of demons struck the monkeys with their own corpses and the monkeys
also struck the titans with their own dead bodies.

Then, grabbing the rocks and mountains, those titans struck the monkeys with them.
The apes too, snatching away their weapons, struck the titans.

The monkeys and demons fractured each other with crags and made a noise with lion's
roars.

The titans, having their armours broken, as struck by the apes, emitted blood at
that place, like trees oozing their sap.

Some monkeys in the battle-front destroyed chariot with chariots, elephants with the
very elephants and horse by the very horses.

The titans broke the trees and rocks of monkey-chiefs with their sharp arrows with
their hoe-shaped head, those arrows with crescent-shaped head and those with spear-like head.

The battle-field, filled with those mountains, broken trees and dead bodies of apes
and titans, became difficult to be traversed.

Reaching the battle-field and abandoning their fear, all those monkeys, with their
thrilling martial arts full of pride, nay, who were having various weapons (like trees, rocks,
teeth and nails) and unrepressed in spirit, carried out battle with the demons.

Seeing the monkeys rejoicing in that tumultuous battle which commenced and the
demons falling down, the great sages and troop of celestials emitted shouts of triumph.

Meanwhile, mounting on a horse having speed equal to the wind, and taking a barbed
javelin, Narantaka entered the terrific army of monkeys, as a fish entering the ocean.

That valiant and mighty Narantaka, the enemy of Indra, single-handedly within an
instant, rent asunder seven hundred monkeys with that shining javelin and killed that army of the
foremost of monkeys.

Vidyadharas, the super natural beings and great sages, saw the mighty Narantaka,
seated on the back of a horse and hacking a path way for himself through the army of monkeys.

His path-way was covered with a mire of flesh and blood, along with heaps of
fallen-down dead-bodes of monkeys, looking like hills.

Whenever the foremost of the monkeys thought of showing their valour, so often
Narantaka overtook and cleaved them.

He burn away the army of monkeys, as the fire burns away the forests. Even before
the monkeys get time to uplift the trees and mountains, the javelin struck them and they fell down,
as mountains riven by lightning.

That mighty Narantaka, the destroyer of men, roamed in all directions in the
battle-field, holding up his shiny javelin, ravaging in all directions like the wind ravaging the
earth in a rainy season.

Narantaka, a single demon, equal to so many demons, struck the armies of mokeys with
his javelin, having the sun's splendour and they fell down on the earth.

Narantaka, a single demon, equal to so many demons, struck the armies of mokeys with
his javelin, having the sun's splendour and they fell down on the earth.

Those monkeys were unable to tolerate the down-onslaught of the javelin, which was
similar to the striking of a thunderbolt and they shouted with a great uproar.

The images of the falling monkeys were flashing like those of falling mountains,
with their peaks shattered by a thunderbolt.

Those great-souled and the foremost of monkeys, who were earlier thrown down by
Kumbhakarna, regained their self and approached Sugreeva.

That Sugreeva, while looking on, saw the army of monkeys running away hither and
thither, as they were tormented of the fear of Narantaka.

To that Sugreeva who was seeing his army running away, Narantaka appeared, coming
seated on the back of a horse, holding a javelin in his hand.

After seeing Narantaka, the vastly splendoured Sugreeva, the king of monkeys spoke
thus, to Angada, the valiant prince, having a prowess equal to Indra's (as follows):

"Go out and quickly detach the lives of this valiant demon, who is riding a horse
and consuming the army of his enemies."

Hearing the words of Sugreeva his sovereign, that valiant Angada then came bouncing
from his army, as the sun coming out of a cloud.

Angada the excellent of monkeys, resembling a rocky mass, wearing bracelets on his
upper arms, looked brilliant like a mountain with its metallic streaks.

Angada the son of Vali, bereft of arms but only nails and teeth besides having a
great splendour, approached Narantaka and spoke the following words:

"Stop! What can you do with these common monkeys? Throw your javelin, having the
sensation equal to a thunderbolt, towards my chest."

Hearing the words of Angada, Narantaka was very much enraged. The enraged Narantaka,
tightly biting his lip with his teeth, hissing like a serpent, approaching Angada and firmly
holding that highly radiant javelin, then quickly released it towards Angada. That javelin broke
against Angada's chest, that was as hard as a diamond and fell to the earth.

Then seeing his javelin shattered, like a serpent whose powerful coils were cut off
by Garuda the eagle, Angada stretched out his palm and struck the head of the horse.

That mountain-like Narantaka's horse, struck by a blow of the palm, had its head
shattered, feet broken, eyes and pupils put out and tongue come out. It fell down on the earth.

Seeing his horse fallen down dead, Narantaka was enraged. Raising his fist, that
exceedingly powerful Narantaka in battle struck Angada on his head.

Then, Angada having his head shattered by the blow of the fist, heavily oozed out
very hot blood, repeatedly felt a burning sensation and swooned. On regaining consciousness, he was
surprised.

Thereupon, the great-souled Angada, the son of Vali, clinching his fist and then
with a force equal to death, rushed it against the chest of Narantaka.

Having his chest deeply sunk back by that fist-blow, giving out flames and with his
limbs smeared by blood, that Narantaka fell down as a mountain is broken up by the fall of a
thundr-bolt.

When that Narantaka of great prowess was killed by Angada in battle, the chiefs of
celestials and the monkeys too then emitted a great roar of triumph in the sky.

Then, that Angada, who showed that forcible means, which was very difficult to do,
and which rejoiced Rama's intellect. So much so, Angada too was surprised. Thereupon Angada, of
terrible acts, was infused with vigour and again showed enthusiasm in battle.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Then, in the battle-front, Rama and Lakshmana were knocked down senseless. The army
of monkey-leaders fainted. Sugreeva, Nila, Angada and Jambavan could not understand what to do.

Seeing the entire army looking worried, Vibhishana, the best among the intelligent
ones, spoke the following matchless words, consoling the warriors of Sugreeva, the lord of
monkeys:

"Honouring the spell sacred of Brahma the creator, the two sons of the venerable
Dasaratha have actually lost their free will and became dejected and have allowed themselves to be
knocked down by the missiles of Indrajit. Hence do not be afraid. There is no occasion for
despondency now."

"This excellent missile, presided over by Brahma the creator, with never-failing
strength, was given to Indrajit by Brahma. Honouring it, Rama and Lakshmana the princes fell down
in battle. This not a time for despondency here."

Then, the intelligent Hanuma, the son of wind-god, paying honour to the missile
presided over by Brahma and hearing the words of Vibhishana, spoke the following words:

"Let us restore to confidence whosoever is in this army of energetic monkeys, after
having been struck by the missile."

Both those valiant ones, Hanuma and Vibhishana, together at that time of the night,
roamed about in the battle-front, with torches in their hands.

Hanuma and Vibhishana saw the battle-field, covered on all sides, with
mountain-sized monkeys fallen with heir tails, arms, thighs, feet, fingers and heaps of heads
fractured with blood oozing from their limbs and urine flowing out. The earth was also covered with
flaming weapons fallen around.

Vibhishana and Hanuma saw Sugreeva, Angada, Nila, Sharabha, Gandhamadana, Gavaksha,
Sushena, Vegadarshi, Mainda, Nala, Jyotimukha and a monkey called Dvivida, who were struck down on
the battle-field.

Sixty seven crores of powerful monkeys were struck down by the cherished missile of
Brahma, the self-born creator, in the fifth and last period* of the day.

Hanuma, along with Vibhishana, began to search for Jambavan, while looking at the
terrific army (wounded by the arrows) which appeared like the tide of an ocean.

Looking at Jambavan, the son of Brahma, who was naturally bequeathed with old age,
an elderly person, with his body conspicuous of hundreds of arrows and a valiant person looking
like an extinguishing fire, Vibhishana approached him and spoke as follows:

"O Vibhishana, the leader of demons, with a great prowess! I am able to recognize
you by your voice alone. Pierced with sharp arrows, I am not able to see you with my eyes."

"O Vibhishana, of good manners! Does Hanuma, the foremost among monkeys, because of
whom, Anjana (his mother) and the wind-god are his blessed parents survive, holding his life any
where nearby?"

Hearing the words of Jambavana, Vibhishana spoke the following words, "why do you
enquire about Hanuman, passing over the venerable sons of Dasaratha?"

"O venerable one! The exceptional affection, you are showing towards Hanuma, is not
being shown towards Sugreeva or Angada or even Rama."

Hearing the words of Vibhishana, Jambavan replied as follows: "O the foremost among
demons! Listen to me, why I am enquiring about Hanuma."

"If that brave Hanuma is surviving, the whole army even if killed, is unhurt. On the
other hand, if Hanuma has given up is life, we are all dead, even though living."

"O dear child! If Hanuma, who is equal to the wind and the fire in prowess,
survives; then there is a hope for all of us to survive.'

Thereafter, Hanuma the son of wind-god approaching the elderly Jambavan, offered his
salutation, by grasping the feet of Jambavan with modesty.

Hearing the voice of Hanuma, Jambavan, the foremost among monkeys, with perturbed
senses, considered himself as though born again.

Thereafter, that Jambavan of great splendour spoke to Hanuma as follows: "Come on, O
foremost of monkeys! You ought to protect the lives of monkeys."

"You are the great companion for these monkeys, by your copious prowess. There is no
other person. This is the appropriate time to show your prowess. I do not see any other person to
do it."

"Cheer up the martial warriors of both monkeys and bears. Heal Rama and Lakshmana
from their arrow-wounds."

"O Hanuma! You ought to go to Himalaya, the foremost of mountains, by traveling
higher and higher over the large ocean."

"O annihilator of enemies! Thereafter, you will see there the Mount Rishabha, the
excellent mountain and the very much powerful peak of Kailasa, with a golden hue."

"O valiant Hanuma! In the midst of these two peaks, you will see a blazing and
unequally brilliant herbal mountain, containing all kinds of herbs."

"O foremost of monkeys! Sprouted on the head of that mountain, are four blazing
herbs. You can see them, illuminating the ten quarters."

"You can see there, Mrita Sanjivani (capable of restoring the dead to life),
Vishalyakarani (capable of extracting weapons and healing all wounds inflicted by weapons),
Suvarnakarani (restoring the body to its original complexion) and Sandhani, the great herb (capable
of joining severed limbs or fractured bone)."

"O Hanuma! Bring all those herbs quickly. O son of wind-god! Bring succour to the
monkeys, by injecting lives into them."

Hearing the words of Jambavan, Hanuma the son of wind-god was infused with animated
strength, as the ocean gets animated with the force of the wind.

Standing on the summit of Trikuta mountain and pressing the foremost of mountains
(with his feet), that valiant Hanuma appeared like a second mountain.

Then, increasingly pressed and bent by Hanuma's feet, that mountain was not able to
bear its weight and sank.

The trees on that mountain, pressed by Hanuma, fell to the ground and caught fire
due to rapidity of Hanuma. Its peaks also got broken.

The monkeys were unable to stand on that excellent mountain, which started to reel,
while being pressed severely by Hanuma, as the trees standing on it and the rocks got broken.

Confounded with panic, the City of Lanka, whose principal gates were broken, whose
houses and town-gates were shattered, appeared as though dancing at night.

Pressing hard the mountain, Hanuma equal to a mountain, caused the earth along with
the ocean to shake.

From that mountain, Hanuma then ascended Mount Malaya, appearing as Mounts Meru and
Mandara, filled with several kinds of cascades, full of many trees and creepers, having Kamala and
Utpala lotuses blooming, visited by celestials and celestial musicians, having a height of sixty
Yojanas (four hundred eighty miles), frequented by Vidyodharas, a number of sages and Apsaras the
nymphs, filled with various kinds of animal-troupes and illuminated by many caves, Hanuma grew his
body, appearing like a cloud, bewildering Yakshas, Gandharvas and Kinnaras.

Pressing the mountain hard with his feet, opening his terrific mouth which shone
like a submarine fire and frightening the demons, Hanuma roared loudly.

Hearing his loud noise, roaring clamorously, the foremost of demons residing in the
City of Lanka, were not able to stir anywhere.

Hanuma of terrific prowess, annihilator of his enemies, after offering salutation to
the ocean, made up his mind to embark on a prime act for the sake of Rama.

Raising his tail which resembled on serpent, bending his back, contracting his ears
and opening his month which shone like a terrific submarines-fire, Hanuma jumped into the sky, with
a head long speed.

By his velocity, he carried away a multitude of trees, mountains and some ordinary
monkeys. Driven up and away by the momentum generated from his arms and thighs, they fell down in
water when their speed diminished.

Stretching his arms, looking like coils of serpents, that Hanuma vying with the
prowess of hostile Garuda the eagle, headed towards the excellent mountain of Himalayas, with gush
as though he was drawing away the four quarters.

Beholding the sea, whose waves along with its water were made to agitate and all
whose creatures were caused to whirl round, Hanuma quickly speeded up, like the discuss loosed by
the fingers of Lord Vishnu.

Gazing at the hills, flocks of birds, lakes, rivers, pools and excellent towns full
of people, that Hanuma with a speed equal to that of the wind-god his father, shot forth towards
Himalayas.

That valiant Hanuma, with a prowess equal to that of his father, whose fatigue was
gone, swiftly rushed, taking recourse to the orbit of the sun.

With a great speed of wind, reverberating the four quarters with sound, Hanuma the
foremost of monkeys, hastened towards Himalayas.

Remembering the words of Jambavan, Hanuma the great monkey with a terrific stride,
suddenly saw Mount Himalaya too.

Hanuma went to Mount Himalaya, the foremost of mountains, embellished with various
kinds of cascades, many kinds of caves, mountain-streams and summits resembling an assemblage of
white clouds as also many kinds of trees.

Having approached that great mountain having excellent overbearing summits, he saw
great holy hermitages, inhabited by a multitude of divine sages.

He saw the abode of Brahma the lord of creation, Kailasa the abode of Shiva the lord
of dissolution, the abode of Indra the lord of celestials, the arrow-discharging place of Rudra,
the worshipping place of Hayagriva, the horse-faced form of Vishnu, the shining place at which
Brahma's head fell down, the sun-god and Kimkaras.

He saw the abode of Agni the fire-god, the abode of Kubera (son of Visrava) shining
like the sun, the spot where the sun was tied down, the abode of Brahma, the abode of bow belonging
to Lord Shiva and the novel of the earth (containing the hole through which one can enter Patala
the nethermost subterranean region).

He saw the gigantic Mount Kailasa, the rock of Mount Himalaya (on which Lord Shiva
is believed to have practiced austerities and abstract meditation) and Mount Rishabha, the lofty
golden mountain, which was highly illumined by the flaming herbs and the lord of mountains on which
all types of herbs grew.

Seeing that mountain shining with a heap of fire, Hanuma the son of wind-god, who is
the envoy of Indra, was surprised to see that great mountain of herbs and then made a search for
the herbs.

That Hanuma, the great monkey, having crossed thousands of yojanas, walked around
that mountain, searching for the heavenly herbs.

Knowing then that somebody was coming in search of them, all the distinguished herbs
on that mountain disappeared from Hanuma's view.

In not seeing them thus, that great souled Hanuma was enraged. He made a loud noise
in anger unable to bear it, Hanuma with his eyes as red as the fire, spoke the following words to
the prince of mountains.

"O prince of mountains! Is it quite sure that you have not shown any compassion for
Rama? If it is so, overcome by the strength of my arms; find yourself shattered to pieces
today."

Fiercely seizing hold of the top of that mountain, furnished with thousands of
minerals, with its trees, elephants and gold, with the projections of mountain shattered and the
crest of its plateau set on fire, at once sprang up with speed.

Having uprooted that mountain, frightening the worlds together with the leaders of
celestials and demons inhabiting them and being praised by many aerial beings, Hanuma sprang up
into the sky and proceeded expeditiously with the terrible speed of Garuda the eagle.

Grasping that mountain-peak, radiant as the sun, that Hanuma who resembled the sun,
having reached the orbit of the sun, shone as a second sun (as sun's image) in the vicinity of the
sun.

In the sky, with that mountain in his hand, that Hanuma the offspring of the
wind-god, who resembled a mountain himself, appeared mostly like Vishnu with his flaming discuss
with its thousand edges holding his hand.

Then, seeing Hanuma, the monkeys made a noise. Seeing them, Hanuma in turn roared in
delight. Hearing their awfully excessive noises the inhabitants of Lanka roared still more
terribly.

Thereupon, the great souled Hanuma descended on that prince of mountains (Trikuta)
in the midst of that army of monkeys. Having offered salutation to the illustrious monkeys there
with his head bent low, he then embraced Vibhishana

By inhaling that fragrance of those great herbs, both Rama and Lakshamana became
healed of their wounds then and there. Other monkey-warriors rose up.

By the fragrance of those most powerful herbs, all those monkey-warriors who were
earlier dead were healed momentarily of their wounds, relieved of their pain, even as those who are
asleep fully get up at the close of night.

From the day the monkeys and demons began to fight in Lanka, from that day onwards,
under the orders of Ravana, all those demons, who were being killed by the foremost of monkeys were
being thrown away into the sea as and when they were killed, merely or the sake of honour (so that
their number may not be known to the monkeys).

Then, Hanuma the son of wind-god, with a great speed, carried away that mountain of
herbs quickly back to the mountains of Himalayas and again joined Rama.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Seeing his own army making a tumultuous sound tottering with excessive fear, seeing
his brothers having a prowess equal to that of Indra the lord of celestials having been killed, and
seeing his paternal uncles as also Yuddhonmatta and Matta (Mahodara and Mahaparshva) his brothers
and the foremost of demons having been fallen down, Atikaya of great splendour, having boons
bestowed by Brahma the lord of creation, having appearance of a mountain and who removed the pride
of celestials and ogres, was enraged.

That Atikaya, the enemy of Indra the lord of celestials, mounting a chariot shining
like a cluster of thousand suns, ran towards the monkeys.

Wearing a crown and well-cleansed ear-rings as also drawing his bow, he roared with
a big noise, making his name loudly heard.

By that lion-like roar, making his name loudly heard and by that terrific sound of
the bow-string, it created terror to the monkeys.

Seeing the bulkiness of his body, all the monkeys, thinking that Kumbhakarna woke up
again, took refuge with each other, afflicted as they were, with fear.

Seeing his form appearing like Vishnu who strided over the three worlds in three
steps, the those renowned monkey-warriors with fear, ran away hither and thither.

When Atikaya was to be attacked, the monkeys were bewildered in mind and sought in
the battle, a refuge with Rama, who affords protection.

Then, Rama saw from a distance, Atikaya, who resembled a mountain in size, stationed
in a chariot, armed with a bow and rumbling like a cloud appearing at the time of universal
dissolution.

Seeing that Atikaya, having a colossal body, Rama for his part was quite surprised
and after consoling the monkeys, spoke to Vibhishana (as follows):

"Who is he, resembling a mountain in size, armed with a bow, brown-eyed and seated
in a spacious chariot yoked with a thousand horses?"

He is shining like Lord Shiva surrounded by genii, with resplendent and sharp
spikes, with very sharply barbed javelins and lances.

"He is shining like a lightening cloud and moving round with staffs which support
the banners of the war-chariot, appearing like tongues of the Time-Sprit."

"Bows adhered with golden backs in his excellent chariot are shining on all sides
like a rainbow in the sky."

"That warrior of demons, the eminent of charioteers, making the battle-front to
shine, is coming in a chariot with the splendour of the sun, with arrows having gleams of
sun-beams, shining in ten directions and embellishing brilliance by an emblem of Rahu installed on
the point of his standard."

"His triply curved, golden backed and decorated bow, having a rumbling sound of the
cloud, is shining like a rain-bow."

"His large chariot, with its flag and emblem, with its axle-tree at the bottom, and
having the sound of a cloud's lightning, consists of four charioteers."

Twenty quivers, ten terrific bows and eight bow-strings, golden and reddish brown in
colour, are abiding in his chariot."

"On that chariot are hanging two swords, clearly measuring ten cubits in length and
provided with measuring four cubits, casting their splendour on his two sides."

"This brave warrior, with a red garland adorning his neck, resembling a large
mountain black in colour and having a month as large as Death, looks like the sun veiled by a
cloud."

"With his arms adorned with gold armlets, he shines like the Himalaya, the highest
mountain with its two lofty peaks."

"His awfully dreadful face, with two ear-rings, is shining like a full moon
appearing between the two stars constituting the constellation, Punnarvasu."

"O the long armed! Tell me who this foremost of demons is! On seeing him all the
monkeys, afflicted with fear, are running away in different directions."

Thus asked by Rama, the prince having an unlimited splendour, that Vibhishana of
great brilliance, replied to Rama as follows:

"The ten-necked king Ravana, having great brilliance, the brother of Kubera the lord
of wealth, doing terrific deeds and possessing a great power, is the lord of demons."

"To him, there is a valiant son, equal to Ravana in combat, who serves elders,
holding that which is heard from them and skilled in the use of weaponry."

"He is respected for his counsel, for his rides on the backs of horses and
elephants, for his drawing out of the sword and the bow, for his strategy winning over to his side
by sowing dissention negotiation and bribery and for his steering capacity of an army.

"He is Atikaya, the son of Dhanyamali. Lanka is feeling fearless, by resting on his
arm."

"He, who purified his soul by meditating on the universal soul, worshipped Brahma
the lord of creation, obtained missiles too and conquered the enemies.

"Brahma, the lord of creation, granted a boon, exempting him from death at the hands
of celestials and demons as also this wonderful armour and the chariot shining like the sun."

"He conquered the celestials and the ogres several times, destroyed Yakshas the
supernatural beings and defended the demons."

"He is Atikaya, who paralyzed the thunderbolt of the intelligent Indra with his
arrows. He struck down the noose of Varuna, the seizer of transgressors. This wise Ravana's son,
who is strong and the foremost of demons took off the pride of celestials and ogres."

"O Rama, the foremost of men! Therefore let the effort to destroy him be made
quickly. Otherwise shortly, he will bring in destruction for our army of monkeys, with his
arrows."

Entering the army of monkeys, the strong Atikaya then stretched his bow and roared
again and again.

Seeing him with a terrific body, seated in the chariot, as the excellent one among
the charioteers, powerful chiefs of monkeys rushed towards him.

Taking trees and mountain peaks, Kumuda, Dvivida, Mainda, Nila and Sharabha marched
forwards quickly to attack him at once.

Atikaya of great splendour, the foremost among those skilled in weaponry, chopped
off their trees and crags with his arrows decked with gold.

That strong and skilled Atikaya with a terrific body, struck all those monkeys,
facing in front of him in battle with arrows fully made of iron.

Those overthrown monkeys, injured with their blown out bodies, by the shower of
Atikaya's arrows in that great battle, were unable to retaliate on him.

That demon, who was arrogant of his youth, frightened that army of monkey-warriors,
as an enraged lion frightens a herd of deers.

That chief of demons did not strike whomsoever of the monkey-warriors who were
unable to fight. That Atikaya, with his bow and quiver of arrows, going up quickly towards Rama,
spoke haughty words (to him) as follows:

"I am seated in the chariot with arrows and a bow in my hand. I would not give
battle with any common warrior. He who has ability and energy can give his fight to me now and here
quickly."

Hearing his words, Lakshmana the annihilator of enemies was enraged. Then, unable to
bear his words and smiling, he rose up quickly and took up his bow.

The enraged Lakshmana, coming forward quickly and taking off an arrow from his
quiver pulled out his great bow in front of Atikaya.

That twang of the bow of Lakshmana, filling the entire quarters, earth, sky and the
ocean, was angry, frightening the demons.

Hearing the terrific twang of Lakshmana's bow, the strong Atikaya of great
splendour, was surprised.

Seeing Lakshmana standing in front of him for the battle, Atikaya then was enraged
and taking a sharp arrow, spoke the following words:

"O Lakshmana! You are still a boy. You are ignorant of a fight. Why do you wish to
fight with me, who is like Yama the Lord of Death? Go away."

"Even the Himalayan Mountains or the sky or the earth would be unable to endure the
speed of arrows released by my arms."

"You wish to arouse a fire of dissolution, when it is sleeping happily. Placing your
bow here, go back. Do not lose your life, by fighting against me."

"If you do not go back, with an obstinance, then you rather stay back. Abandoning
your lives, you will reach the abode of Yama."

"See my sharp arrows decked with pure gold, which can remove the pride of my enemies
and which are like the weapons of Ishvara the lord of destruction."

"This arrow looking like a serpent will drink your blood as a lion drinks the blood
of an elephant. "Thus speaking, Atikaya was enraged and fixed an arrow on his bow.

Hearing the words of Atikaya, filled with anger and arrogance in that battle-field,
Lakshmana was enraged. Thereafter, that Lakshmana, having a great strength wisdom and great glory,
also spoke as follows:

"O the evil-minded! Just by uttering mere words, you cannot by a very important
person. People cannot become good persons, just by boasting of themselves. You rather show your
strength in me, who is standing with an arrow in hand and wielding a bow."

"Reveal yourself by your deeds. You do not deserve to boast of yourself. A person
with valour alone is declared as a warrior."

"You are seated in a chariot, with all the weaponry and wielding a bow. Show your
prowess either by your arrows or even by your weapons."

"Thereupon, with sharp arrows, I shall strike down your head like a fruit of a
fan-palm, ripened by its time, is fallen down from its stalk by the gust of a wind."

"Today, these arrows of mine decked with pure gold, will drink blood oozing forth
from the holes formed in your body by the sharp points of my arrows."

"Thinking me to be a boy, you need not disregard me. Either as the boy or as the
aged, you indeed know me in battle-front as the god of Death. Vishnu, as a boy occupied the three
worlds just with his three strides, Didn't he?"

Hearing the reasonable and highly meaningful words of Lakshmana, Atikaya was very
much enraged and took out an excellent arrow.

Then, Vidyadharas the supernatural beings, Bhutas the spirits, Devas the celestials,
Daityas the demons, Maharshies the great sages and Guhyakas a class of demi-gods, all the great
souled ones saw that battle.

Thereafter, the enraged Atikaya, stringing an arrow to his bow, dispatched it
towards Lakshmana, as though he were shrinking up the space in between.

Lakshmana, the annihilator of enemy-warriors, chopped off that serpent-like sharp
arrow, which was falling down on him, with his crescent-pointed arrow.

Seeing that arrow which was chopped off as a snake's hood severed into pieces,
Atikaya was very much enraged and fitted five arrows to his bow.

That demon hurled those arrows towards Lakshmana. Even before they reached him,
Lakshmana chopped them off with his sharp arrows.

Cutting off those arrows with his sharp arrows that Lakshmana, the destroyer of
enemy-warriors, took up a sharp arrow, as though it was blazing with a glow.

Taking that arrow, Lakshmana harnessed it on his excellent bow, stretched it with
force and released it.

That valiant Lakshmana, by a flat-jointed arrow released fully, struck it on the
forehead of that excellent demon.

That arrow, sunken into the forehead of that terrible demon, smeared with blood,
appeared like a serpent-king on a mountain.

The demon, tormented by Lakshmana's arrow, then trembled violently as when the
terrific town-gate of Tripura City, (built of gold, silver and iron in the sky, air and earth by
Maya for the demons) was struck by Shiva's arrow.

That demon of great strength, recovering his breath, reasoningly reflected as
follows: "Well! By flying down an arrow, you have become a commendable enemy for me."

Thus speaking with his mouth wide open, Atikaya bent down with his large shoulder,
ascended the top of his chariot and roamed about hither and thither by his chariot.

Atikaya, the foremost of demons, seized hold of one, three, five and seven arrows
and fixed them to his bow, stretched it and released the arrows.

Those arrows, released from the bow of Atikaya, the leader of demons, appearing as
Death, with golden shafts and shining like the sun, set the sky ablaze.

Thereupon, Lakshmana coolly chopped off those gluts of arrows released by that
foremost of demons, by the multitude of his sharp arrows.

That Atikaya, of great splendour, fixing that arrow to his bow and by instantly
releasing it, struck the approaching Lakshmana in the middle of his chest.

That Atikaya, of great splendour, fixing that arrow to his bow and by instantly
releasing it, struck the approaching Lakshmana in the middle of his chest.

Struck in battle by Atikaya in his chest, Lakshmana oozed out blood severely, like
the fluid exuding from a rutting elephant.

That powerful Lakshmana, then quickly made himself freed from that arrow-head, took
up a sharp arrow and fixed it with a missile.

When Lakshmana employed the missile of fire on his arrow, that arrow of the great
souled Lakshmana and as also the bow, caused a flame to blaze.

Atikaya of great splendour took up a solar missile and employed it on that arrow,
having a golden shaft as also looking like a serpent.

Meanwhile, Lakshmana hurled at Atikaya, that blazing and awful arrow employed with
that mystic missile as Yama the lord of Death would hurl his rod of destruction.

Seeing that arrow charged with a mystic missile of fire, Atikaya the demon then
released the awful arrow charged with the solar missile.

Those two arrows, having their points blazed in splendour, struck at each other in
the sky, like two enraged serpents.

Those two excellent arrows, eventhough they were both blazing, did not radiate any
longer on the earth's surface, in that they were without a flame and had been reduced to ashes.

Thereupon, the enraged Atikaya released an arrow made of cane (a missile) presided
over by Tvasha (the architect of gods). Then, the valiant LakShmana chopped off that missile, by
his missile presided over by Indra the lord of celestials.

Seeing his arrow made of cane struck down, that young Atikaya was quite enraged and
fixed his arrow with a missile presided over by Yama the lord of retribution.

Thereupon, Atikaya hurled that missile on Lakshmana. That Lakshmana struck it down
by a missile presided over by the wind-god.

Then, the furious Lakshmana showered forth hails of arrows on Atikaya, as a rainy
cloud showers hails of down-pour.

Reaching Atikaya, those arrows with the points of their shafts shattered on his
armour, adorned with diamonds and instantly fell on the earth's surface.

Seeing those arrows becoming unsuccessful, the highly famous Lakshmana the
annihilator of enemy-warriors, showered forth arrows in thousands.

Atikaya, that mighty demon, though deluged with a flood of arrows, was not agitated
in battle because of the inviolability of his armour.

Atikaya released an arrow having a serpent-like form on Lakshmana. Struck by that
arrow on his vital parts, that Lakshmana, the tormentator of his enemies, felt unconscious just for
a moment.

Having regained his consciousness, the mighty Lakshmana, the annihilator of enemies,
with his flood of arrows threw down the flag-staff and killed the horses and the charioteer in
combat, with his four excellent arrows.

Free from flurry, that Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, released those arrows, exactly
aiming at that demon, for the purpose of killing him.

Lakshmana, the best among men, was not able to afflict any injury to Atikaya in
battle. Then, the wind-god came to him and spoke to him as follows:

"He, endowed with a boon by Brahma the lord of creation, is cloaked by inviolable
armour. Split him with a missile of Brahma. He cannot be killed by any other means. The mighty
Atikaya, with that armour, cannot be destroyed by other missiles."

Then, hearing the words of the wind-god, Lakshmana having a prowess equal to that of
Indra the lord of celestials, adjusting his arrow with a missile presided over by Vrahma, quickly
directed the arrow with a terrific force.

While fixing that excellent missile on that superior sharp-pointed arrow by
Lakshmana, all the quarters, the sun, the moon, the great planets and the sky were frightened.
Earth also made an uproar.

Having charged the missile of Brahma on that arrow with the feathers and all, equal
to a messenger of Yama the lord of Death over his bow, Lakshmana released that arrow looking like a
thunderbolt on Atikaya, the son of Ravana.

Atikaya saw that arrow, released with augmented force by Lakshmana, moving so fastly
as the wind, having beautiful wings with variegated feathers and looking like a thunderous
thunderbolt, approaching him in battle.

Seeing that arrow, Atikaya quickly struck with several sharp arrows. That
Lakshmana's arrow, with a speed equal to Garuda the eagle, thus reached Atikaya's proximity.

Seeing that blazing arrow, looking like Yama the lord of Death and black in colour,
approaching him, Atikaya then struck it with spike, spear, mace, axe and arrows.

Then, that arrow, blazing like fire, made in vain those weapons of wonderful form
and taking Atikaya's head, carried it away.

That head with its diadem, chopped off by Lakshmana, quickly fell down on the
ground, like a peak of the Himalayan Mountain.

Seeing Atikaya falling on the ground, with his clothes and ornaments scattered away,
all the surviving demons became perturbed.

Many of those depressed demons, dejected as they were, showing fatigue born of
fighting, in their faces, suddenly began to shout loudly, with their voices in discordant
notes.

As their leader was dead, the demons were then frightened and becoming indifferent
to fight, went running away all around, with their faces turned towards that City of Lanka.

When the dangerous demon with the terrific strength was killed, the multitude of
monkeys then were endowed with a great delight, with their faces looking like full blown lotuses
and worshipped Lakshmana who got his desire fulfilled.

Throwing down in battle, that Atikaya who was exceedingly strong and looking like a
cloud, Lakshmana was greatly delighted and while he was being worshipped by the multitude of
monkeys, thereupon quickly hastened towards the proximity of Rama.
undefined
undefined
undefined

While that terrific battle, which destroyed many eminent heroes, was in progress,
Angada, who was eager to fight, attacked the valiant Kampana.

Calling Angada to fight, Kampana with fury, rapidly struck him with a mace in
anticipation. Violently hit by him, Angada was reeled.

Restoring consciousness, the energetic Angada hurled a mountain peak. Tormented by
that stroke, Kampana fell down on the ground.

Then, seeing Kampana killed in battle, Shonitaksha fearlessly rushed there towards
Angada quickly in a chariot.

He then swiftly struck Angada with sharp pointed arrows which can tear up the limbs
and with fire-like forms which can destroy the world. He struck with many sharp arrows by the names
of Kshura, Kshurapra, Naaraacha, Vatsatanta, Shilimukha, Karni, Shalya and Vipatha.

The strong and powerful Angada, the son of Vali, with his wounded limbs, crushed his
terrific bow, chariot and darts with his might.

Then, Shonitaksha quickly took a sword and a shield. Enraged as he was, he swiftly
jumped down (from his chariot) unhesitatingly.

Springing forward more swiftly, seizing hold of him with his hand and snatching away
the sword, the strong Angada made a lion's roar.

Angada the foremost of monkeys the sword into the flat surface of his shoulder and
cut him from left to right diagonally.

Taking hold of that large sword and repeatedly roaring, Angada rushed towards the
other surviving enemies in the battle-front.

Taking hold of that large sword and repeatedly roaring, Angada rushed towards the
other surviving enemies in the battle-front.

That valiant Shonitaksha, wearing golden armlets, restoring his consciousness, took
an iron mace and rushed quickly towards the same Angada.

The strong and the great warrior, Prajangha on his part, along with Yupaksha, was
enraged and rushed towards the mighty Angada with his mace.

Angada, the chief of monkeys, between the two warriors, Shonitaksha and Prajangha,
shone like a full moon between the two asterisms known as Vishakhas.

Protecting Angada, Mainda and Dvivida took their position near Angada, with an
intent to exhibit each of their own martial skill.

The mighty demons with their colossal bodies retaliated and rushed in anger,
wielding swords, arrows and maces, towards the monkeys.

A great battle, causing hair to stand on end, was waged by the three monkey-chiefs
who encountered the three excellent demons.

In the battle-field, the monkeys, seizing hold of trees, hurled them against the
demon-chiefs. The mighty Prajangha, however, cut them down with his sword.

The monkeys in the battle-field hurled trees and rocks towards chariots and horses.
The mighty Yupaksha chopped them off with a flood of arrows.

Shonitaksha, the valiant and the powerful demon, chopped off the trees uplifted and
hurled by Dvivida and Mainda with his mace in the midway itself.

Prajangha, lifting a large sword, which can chop off vital parts of the enemies,
rushed swiftly towards Angada.

Then the mighty Angada, who was exceedingly strong, seeing him coming nearer, struck
him with an Ashvakarna tree.

Angada struck, with his fist, the arm of Prajangha, holding the sword. By that blow,
the sword fell on the ground.

Seeing that sword looking like a pebble (in shape), which fell on the ground, the
mighty Prajangha tightened his thunderbolt like fist.

When that Prajangha of great splendour struck Angaa, the excellent monkey with a
great strength on his forehead, Angada shuddered for a moment.

That Angada of splendour and prowess, restoring his consciousness, struck with his
fist and shattered Prajangha's head off his trunk.

That Yupaksha, with tears filled in his eyes because of the death of his paternal
uncle in battle, quickly took a sword as his arrows were exhausted and descended from his
chariot.

Seeing that Yupaksha rushing on him, Dvivida hurriedly struck Yupaksha on his chest
and with a rage, forcibly caught hold of him.

Seeing his mighty brother being seized, Shonitaksha, of great splendour, then struck
Dvivida on his chest.

That mighty Dvivida, struck by Shonitaksha was tottered; but pulled off the
platter's mace when lifted again on him.

Meanwhile, Mainda came nearer to Dvivida and banged Yupaksha on his chest with his
palm.

Those two demons, Shonitaksha and Yupaksha, who were full of violence, carried on a
keen contest with the two monkeys in the battle field, by pulling and overthrowing them vehemently
and severely.

The valiant Dvivida, after splitting open shonitaksha's face with his claws, threw
him down on the floor by his strength and crushed him down.

Mainda, the foremost of monkeys, was enraged and pressed Yupaksha with his arms.
Yupaksha fell down dead on the ground.

That army of demons, which was perturbed with their great warriors killed, then
moved with its face turned towards the place where Kumbha (the son of Kumbhakarna) was carrying on
battle.

Kumbha, restored to confidence, that army which was coming towards him with speed.
Then, seeing the army of demons whose chief-warriors were thrown down by the most powerful monkeys
who could fulfill their aim, the powerful Kumbha then performed a great feat which was very
difficult to do in a battle.

That Kumbha, the foremost among the wielders of bow, taking his bow and fully
composed, released serpentine arrows which can split open the bodies.

That excellent bow of his, fitted with an arrow, shone like a second bow of Indra
(the rain-god), illumined by flashes of lightning and the splendour of Airavata (the elephant
carrying Indra on its back).

By that arrow with a golden shaft and fastened with feathers, drawn upto his ear and
discharged, he then struck Dvivida.

Suddenly struck by that arrow, that excellent monkey possessing a splendour of Mount
Trikuta, was perturbed, with his feet swaying to and fro and fell down throbbing.

Beholding his brother defeated in that great battle, Mainda there on his part,
taking a large rock, rushed with speed to attack the demon.

While that mighty Mainda hurled that rock towards the demon, Kumbha broke that rock
into pieces with his five shining arrows.

Stretching another arrow resembling a serpent and with a good pointed tip, Kumbha of
a great splendour, struck it on the chest of Mainda the brother of Dvivida.

As that blow of Kumbha's arrow struck that Mainda, the monkey-chief, on his vital
parts, he fell unconscious on the ground.

Seeing both his mighty maternal uncles wounded, Angada rushed speedily towards
Kumbha, who was standing with his bow uplifted.

With five steel arrows and with three other sharp-edged arrows, Kumbha pierced that
Angada advancing towards him, as on would pierce an elephant with goads.

That valiant Kumbha pierced Angada with a multiple of sharp arrows, decked in gold,
with edges which were harsh and sharp.

Angada, the son of wind-god, though pierced all over the body with sharp arrows, was
however not shaken. He showered a rain of rocks and trees on Kumbha's head.

The glorious Kumbha the son of Kumbhakarna chopped off all those trees hurled by
Angada and burst off the rocks further.

Seeing Angada the monkey-chief rushing upon him, Kumbha pierced his brows with his
brows with his arrows, as an elephant would be struck with flaming torches.

Since Angada's blood was oozing out, his eyes were covered with blood; Covering his
eyes, dampened with blood, with one hand, he caught hold of a Sala tree nearby with another
hand.

In the battle-field, propping that tree with branches and all, on his chest, holding
it with his hand and bending a little, Angada uprooted it from the ground.

While all the demons were looking on, Angada hurled that tree-which was tall like
Indra's banner and resembled Mount Mandara in size.

That Kumbha chopped off that tree with seven sharp arrows which were capable of
splitting asunder the body. That Angada was very much perturbed and fell down, swooning.

Seeing the unconquerable Angada fallen down and sinking into depression as though in
an ocean, the monkey-chiefs informed the matter to Rama.

Hearing of Angada being seized with anguish in that great combat, Rama sent out for
help, leaders of monkeys, headed by Jambavan.

Hearing Rama's message, those excellent monkeys were very much enraged and quickly
rushed towards Kumbha who was wielding a bow in his hand.

With an intent to defend Angada, the monkey-chiefs then holding trees and rocks in
their hands and with their furious blood-red eyes, rushed on.

The enraged Jambavan, Sushena and Vegadarshi, the monkey ran up towards Kumbha the
son of Kumbhakarna to attack him.

Seeing those mighty monkey-chiefs coming nearer to him, Kumbha covered them with a
flood of arrows, as one would obstruct the course of a stream by means of a rock.

Reaching the range of his arrows, the great souled monkey-chiefs were unable even to
look at him, much less advance towards him, any more than a great ocean would overstep its
shore.

Seeing those troops of monkeys being tormented by a flood of arrows, Sugreeva the
king of monkeys, keeping Angada his brother's son in the rear, rushed headlong towards Kumbha in
the battle, as a swift lion would bounce upon an elephant walking along the slopes of a
mountain.

Uprooting many large trees beginning with Ashvakarna and many kinds of trees,
Sugreeva the king of monkeys hurled them on Kumbha.

The illustrious Kumbha, the son of Kumbhakarna, with his sharp arrows, chopped off
that down pour of trees, which was obscuring the sky and which was difficult to be assailed.

The trees, chopped off with his sharp arrows by the brutal Kumbha, skilled in
hitting his target, shone like terrific Shataghnis (stones or cylindrical pieces of wood studded
with iron spikes).

Seeing that shower of trees chopped off by Kumbha, the mighty and illustrious
Sugreeva of valour was not disturbed.

Enduring those arrows being hit, Sugreeva snatched away Kumbha's bow, possessing the
splendour of a rain-bow and broke it all at once.

Thus bouncing swiftly and doing that most difficult task, the enraged Sugreeva spoke
(as follows) to Kumbha, who was looking like an elephant with a broken tusk.

"O Kumbha, the elder brother of Nikumbha! Both your prowess and the swiftness of
your arrow are wonderful. Both Ravana and you are equal in complaisance towards demons and the
majesty too exists.

"O Kumbha, the compeer of Prahlada, Bali, Indra (the destroyer of the demon Vritra),
Kubera (the god of riches) and Varuna (the god of water)! You alone are born with a likeness of
your father (Kumbhakarna) who was exceedingly strong."

"The celestials cannot surpass even you alone, with a spike in hand, who can destroy
the enemy with your large arms, as mental agonies cannot overwhelm the one who subdued his senses.
Hence, exhibit your prowess, O demon of great intellect and see my exploits."

"Because of the boon received by him, Ravana your uncle is able to attack the
celestials and demons. But Kumbhakarna (your father) on his part is tolerating the celestials and
demons."

"You are equal in archery to Indrajit and in prowess to Ravana. Hence, you are now
the foremost in strength and heroism among the demon-folk."

"Let the created beings see your great wonderful fight with me in the battle field
today, as they saw that fight between Indra and Shambara, the demon."

"You have performed an incomparable task. You have also shown your skill in missile
weaponry. You have struck down these monkey-heroes possessing a terrific prowess."

"O valiant demon! Since you look tired after performing your martial duty, I did not
kill you, with a fear of public censure. Identify my strength, after taking some rest."

Kumbha was thus honoured with those insulting words of Sugreeva. Kumbha's splendour
then enhanced, like the splendour of the sacrificial fire, when a melted butter is offered to it as
an oblation."

The reopen, Kumbha pressingly clasped Sugreeva in his arms. Then, they stood
breathing heavily again and again as elephants in rut, having their bodies fastened against each
other, rubbing one another and emitting a flame to blaze with smoke from their faces because of
their fatigue.

The battle-ground sank under the trampling of their feet. With their waves whirled
about, the ocean became turbulent.

Then tossing up Kumbha, Sugreeva threw him down speedily into the ocean, showing him
the bottom of the sea.

Due to the hurling down of Kumbha, the fully risen sea, reaching a height of as to
that of Mount Vindhya, diffused on all sides.

The enraged Kumbha, then jumping up and throwing down Sugreeva, struck him on his
chest with his thunderbolt-like fist.

Sugreeva's armour was burst asunder. Even blood appeared oozing out of his chest.
His cage of bones gave a counter-strike to that awfully forceful fist.

Then, by the force of that fist shot forth there, a mighty flame resembling the fire
that bursts up on Mount Meru, was born out of a stroke of lightning.

Thus struck by Kumbha there, that mighty Sugreeva, the chief of monkeys, tightened
his fist which appeared like a thunderbolt.

The valiant Sugreeva forcefully descended his fist, which shone like the solar disc
encircled by a thousand rays, on the breast of Kumbha.

That Kumbha, very much hurt by that blow, was exhausted and then fell down, like
fire whose flame has extinguished.

Thus struck with Sugreeva's fist, that demon fell down suddenly, as the planet Mars,
of splendid rays, would drop down from the sky accidentally.

When Kumbha was killed in battle by Sugreeva the chief of monkeys, possessing a
terrific prowess, the earth with its mountains and forests trembled. Too much fear seized the
demons.
undefined
undefined
undefined

While those consorts were weeping on that occasion, Mandodari, the senior most and
beloved wife of Ravana, who was feeling miserable, stared at her husband.

Gazing at Ravana, her husband who was killed by Rama of unimaginable exploits,
Mandodari there, miserably lamented (as follows):

"O the great armed, the brother of Kubera! Even Indra the destroyer of strongholds,
indeed dares not to stand before you, when you were enraged."

"Because of fear from you, eminent sages, illustrious Gandharvas the celestial
musicians and the wandering bards indeed fled in all directions."

"O the lord of demons! O king! How is it that you are not ashamed, though you were
conquered in battle, by Rama, a mere mortal?"

"How did a mortal, wandering in a forest, killed you, who having overcome the three
worlds by dint of your prowess, had grown irresistible and were endowed with glory?"

"It is not possible of annihilation of yourself, who lived in a place not accessible
to men and was able to assume any form at your will, by Rama in battle."

"I do not believe this act of Rama in the battle-front, nor do I believe of the
attack by him, on your army, fully equipped with all the implements of war."

"The moment your brother Khara was killed by Rama in Janasthana, though surrounded
by a multitude of demons, it became evident that Rama was really no mortal."

"We felt painful, the moment Hanuma penetrated, by dint of his prowess, deep into
the City of Lanka, which was difficult to be entered even for gods."

"The day when the terrific monkeys built a bridge on the great ocean, that day
itself I believed that Rama was not an ordinary mortal."

"Otherwise, for your destruction, Yama, the lord of Death came himself assuming the
form of Rama having arranged an unimaginable form of illusion."

"O the mighty lord! Otherwise, you might have been overpowered by Indra the lord of
celestials. But for Indra, where is the capacity even to behold you in battle?

"This Rama is certainly a great ascetic, an eternal person, having no beginning
middle or end, greater than distinguished universal spirit like Brahma, the one beyond ignorance,
the nourisher, wielding a conch, a disc and a mace, wearing the 'Srivatsa' mark on his chest, of
lasting beauty, incapable of being conquered, a perpetual one, being the constant soul of the
universe, truly mighty, the lord of all the worlds, the prosperous one having a great splendour and
Vishnu, the lord of maintenance of the world with a wish to benefit the worlds, assuming a human
form surrounded by all the gods in the form of monkeys, Rama killed you, surrounded by demons.

"In the past, by performing a great penance, you conquered the senses and conquered
the three worlds. Now, as if revenging that enmity, those very senses conquered you."

"The moment your brother Khara was killed by Rama in Janasthana, though surrounded
by a multitude of demons, it became evident that Rama was really no mortal. We felt perturbed, the
moment Hanuma penetrated, by dint of his prowess, deeply into the City of Lanka, which was
difficult to be entered even for gods."

"This evil result has come upon you, since you did not heed to my advice, saying
that no hostility should be entered into with Rama."

"O the foremost of demons! For the annihilation of your power, your body and your
own people, you conceived a desire for Seetha suddenly."

"O the foolish one! An unworthy act was indeed done by you, in offending Seetha, who
was more distinguished and more respectable than Arundhati (wife of sage Vasishta) and Rohini (the
principal spouse of moon-god)."

"O my lord, who annihilated yourself and your people! Seetha is the model of
forbearance even to the Goddess Earth and a model of grace to Lakshmi, the goddess of fortune and
charm. She is extremely fond of her husband. By a recourse to a fraud in bringing that Seetha in a
lonely forest, faultless in every limb as she was, and charming though miserable, and having failed
to fulfill your desire for union with Seetha and due to your own fault you have been surely
consumed by the asceticism of that woman, devoted as she was to her husband."

"It is because, the gods together with Indra the ruler of gods including those
headed by the fire-god fear you, that you were not consumed even while you were laying hands on
Seetha, the slender-waisted woman."

"There is no doubt that when the time comes, the doer surely reaps a harsh fruit of
his sinful deed."

"The doer of an auspicious act obtains happiness, while the doer of a sinful act
reaps misery. While Vibhishana has obtained happiness, you met with such an evil destiny."

"There are other women, more excellent in form than Seetha for you in your
gynaecium. Having fallen a prey to the power of passion, you did not know it through
ignorance."

"Seetha is no match for me either in birth or in beauty or in amiability. You did
not perceive this through infatuation."

"At any time, there is no causeless death for any living being. As for you, this
Seetha has become a cause."

"Death which was brought about on account of Seetha was invited by you from a
far-off distance. Free from sorrow, Seetha will now be enjoying herself with Rama."

"I, however, whose stock of merit was deficient, have fallen into a terrific ocean
of grief. I, who having enjoyed myself with you in suitable aerial cars in Mount Kailasa, mount
Mandara, Mount Meru and in a grove named Chaitraratha and in all celestial gardens, decked as was
with lovely garlands and clad in colorful robes and invested in matchless splendour, visiting and
seeing various lands of every description have now been deprived of all sense- enjoyments because
of your death. Though the same, I stand transformed into another as it were. Woe be to the
flickering fortunes of kings!"

"Alas, O king! That face of yours which was so tender, O lord, and distinguished by
charming eye-brows, a gloss surface, having an exceptionally prominent nose, coppery lips and
brilliant ear-rings, which vied with the moon the lotus and the sun in loveliness, light and
luster, was illumined by a number of diadems, which shone with its eyes wild and rolling through
inebriety in banqueting places, bore garlands of various kinds, was lovely and charming in every
way, was lit with a captivating smile and indulged in a delightful talk - that face of yours does
not actually shine as before today pierced with Rama's arrows, it lies dyed with streams of blood.
It has its marrow shattered and has got soiled through the dust raised by the chariots."

"Alas! The last stage of my life, which conferred widow ship on me, has come and
which was never contemplated me at any time; a stupid woman as I am."

"I was very much proud that my father was king of demons, my husband a lord of
demons and my son, a conqueror of Indra the lord of celestials."

"I had a firm conviction that my guardians were capable of crushing their arrogant
adversaries, heroes as they were, renowned for their might and valour, and as such had no fear from
any quarter."

"How did this unknown danger come from a mortal to you, who were so powerful?"

"O king! The body of yours which was really dark as glossy sapphire, gigantic like a
lofty mountain and resplendent with Keyuras and Angadas (two varieties of armlets) and necklace of
cat's eye-gems and pearls and wreaths of flowers, which body looked more charming during your
pleasure-walks and dazzling in battle-fields, which shone with luster of jewels as a rainy cloud
with flashes of lightning lies transfixed in numerous sharp arrows today. Though it will be
difficult for me to touch it again, it is no longer possible to embrace it. It has tendons cut to
pieces, by arrows of Rama, dug deep into your vital parts and closely transfixed like the spines of
a porcupine. Though dark of complexion, it is now transformed into the colour of blood and lies
fallen on the ground like a mountain broken into pieces when hit by a stroke of thunder-bolt."

"Alas! Is it a dream? Is it the reality? But, how could you be killed by Rama? You
were the death, even to Death himself. How did you depart from this world, falling under the sway
of Death?

"My husband enjoyed the wealth of all the three worlds. He gave tremendous fear to
the three worlds. He conquered the guardians of the worlds and lifted up Lord Shiva (along with his
seat, Mount Kailasa)."

"My husband held down those who were arrogant. He manifested his prowess and shook
up the worlds. He caused the living beings to weep, with his roars."

"He used to utter arrogant words with vigour in the presence of his enemies. He was
the protector for his troop and his servants. He was the killer of those who indulged in terrible
acts."

"He was the killer of the lords of demons and Yakshas the super natural beings in
thousands. He was drawing to himself, the demons called Nivatakavachas, in battles."

"My husband ruined several sacrificial performances. He was the protector of his own
people. He violated the moral order. He violated the moral order. He created conjuring tricks on
the battle-field."

"He used to bring the virgin-daughters of gods, demons and human beings from here
and there. He brought mourning to his enemy's wives. He was the leader of his own people."

"He was the protector of the island of Lanka. He was the doer of terrible deeds. He
was the bestower of desires and sensual gratifications to us. He was excellent among the
chariot-warriors."

"Seeing my husband with such power struck down by Rama, I, having my husband killed,
am hard-hearted indeed, still bearing this body."

"Having reposed on very valuable coaches, O the king of demons, why are you lying
buried in sleep slumber on the bare ground and shrouded in dust?"

"When Indrajit, your son was killed in battle by Lakshmana, I was hard-hit then and
today, of course, I am completely beaten down."

"Bereft of kinsfolk and forsaken by you, my lord, and deprived of desires and
sensual enjoyments, I shall lament for ever more years."

"O king! Having embarked today on a long journey, which is very difficult to be
traversed, take me too with you, tormented as I am with grief. I shall not survive without
you."

"Why do you intend to go, leaving me here, miserable as I am? Why do you not speak
to me, a sad and lamenting creature, and unfortunate as I am?"

"O Lord! Are you not indeed enraged, in seeing me on foot in this way out through
the city-gate, unveiled and come on foot in the way?

"O lover of your consorts! Look at all your spouses, who came out, with their veils
dropped off. Why are you not getting enraged in seeing this?"

"This Mandodari, who was helping in your sport with you, is weeping with
helplessness. You are not consoling her. Do you not have a high esteem of her?"

"You have fallen under the sway of your enemies in that you were cursed by the
numerous women of noble lineage, who, though devoted to their husband, fond of piety and intent on
the service of their elders, had been widowed by you, O king, and were accordingly tormented with
grief. That curse which was pronounced at that time by those aggrieved women on their having been
wronged by you, has fallen on you."

"The popular saying that the tears of virtuous wives d not generally fall on the
ground in vain' has come out probably true in your case O king!"

"How was this mean act of abducting a lady, done by you, who having invaded the
three worlds, were proud f your prowess?"

"It was indeed a mark of your cowardice that Rama's consort was borne away by you,
after luring away Rama from his hermitage in the pretext of deer"

"I do not recall your faint-heartedness at any time on the battle-field. That case
of abduction of Seetha, however, was due to your ill-luck and certainly as the result of your
sins."

"O the mighty armed one! Whatever my younger brother-in-law, Vibhishana who knows
matters relating to the pat and of the future and also conversant with the present said after
reflecting and sighing for long, on seeing Seetha abducted by you: 'The destruction of the chiefs
among the demons now is imminent, have become true words. This misfortune had come from the lust,
wrath and addiction to the vice of deep attachment."

"This major disaster occurred, destroying our very root, because of you. This entire
race of demons has been deprived of its protector, by you."

"You, who were far illustrious for your strength and prowess, do not deserve to be
lamented for by me. But, because of feminine nature, my mind is leaning towards melancholy."

"By taking away your merit and sin, you obtained your course of fate. I, however,
mourn for my own self, so afflicted as I am, by your death."

"O Ravana! You did not hear the advice of your friends, who wish for your welfare.
Nor did you hear the words of your brothers completely."

"The counsel offered by Vibhishana, which was endowed with reason, meaning, rule of
conduct, wholesome, gentle and well-founded, was not implemented by you."

"The advices offered by Mareecha, Kumbhakarna, myself and my father have not been
heeded by you, who were arrogant of your prowess. What is followed is a bitter consequence of your
perversity."

"My lord, resembling a dark cloud in hue, clad in yellow and decked with brilliant
armlets, why are you lying with your limbs, cast away on the ground and bathed in blood?"

"As though fast asleep, why are you not replying to me, the granddaughter of Somali
the demon who was clever, endowed with extraordinary prowess and never retreated in battles,
tormented with grief as I am?"

"Arise, arise! Why are you lying down, though subjected to a fresh insult? The sun's
rays have penetrated deep into Lanka today, without any fear."

"Torn into thousand pieces, that iron bludgeon of yours, which was brilliant as the
sun, like a thunderbolt of Indra, with which you killed your enemies in the battle-field, which was
constantly honoured by you, which had struck many in battle and which was decked with gold, lies
scattered."

Why are you lying down, embracing the battle-ground, as one would embrace a loved
one? Why do you not feel inclined to reply to me, as though I were abhorrent to you?"

"Woe be to me, that my heart is not bursting into pieces, tormented as I am with
grief, now that you have returned to the five elements."

Lamenting thus, with her eyes filled with tears and her heart moistened with love,
Mandodari, at that time, fell into a swoon.

Fallen on the breast of Ravana, that dispirited Mandodari, stricken as she was with
grief, shone like a vivid flash of lightning across a rainy cloud, reddened by the flow of
twilight.

Raising up Mandodari, who was in that condition bitterly weeping, her co-wives who
were also weeping, very much distressed as they were, began to console her (as follows):

"Don't you know the uncertain state of the worlds, O queen, that the wealth of kings
is unsteady, when there is a change in the tide of their fate?"

While they were consoling thus, Mandodari, moistening her breasts and her spotless
face in tears, wept aloud at that moment.

In the meanwhile, Rama spoke to Vibhishana as follows: "Let the obsequies of your
brother be performed and let these crews of women be consoled."

Reflecting with his intellect, the intelligent Vibhishana, the knower of virtue,
thereupon, spoke to Rama, the following words, which were in conformity with righteousness and
self-interest.

"I am not obliged to perform the obsequies to him, who had abandoned the vow of
virtue, who was cruel, who killed human beings, who was a cheater and who had longed for others'
wives."

"This Ravana, who was interested in wishing evil to all, though venerable as a
respectable elder, is not fit for honour. He is my enemy, in the guise of a brother."

"If I do not perform obsequies, O Rama, the human beings on earth will speak about
me as ruthless. But, on hearing about his bad qualities all of them will speak of it as a good
act."

Hearing those words, Rama the best among the supporters of virtue and skilled in
speech, was very much pleased and spoke the following words to Vibhishana, the intelligent one in
his speech.

"O king of demons! I too have to do a favour to you. I won the battle because of
you. Certainly I have to give you an appropriate advice."

"This demon may be full of unrighteousness and falsehood. But, he was brilliant,
strong and ever a brave warrior in battles."

"It is heard that Ravana who was mighty, endowed with strength and who was causing
people to cry, was not conquered by the chiefs like Indra and others."

"Hostilities end with death. Our purpose has been accomplished. Let his funeral
rites be performed. He is even as good mine also, as yours."

"According to rule, Ravana is eligible to get the last rites on his dead body from
you, by usage. You will also become fit for glory."

Having heard the words of Rama, Vibhishana in haste began to do obsequies to Ravana,
his dead brother.

Entering the City of Lanka, that Vibhishana, the lord of demons, quickly concluded
the Agnihotra (the act of pouring oblations into the sacred fire) carried on by Ravana.

Vibhishana actually caused to be brought together, carts, excellent varieties of
firewood, the three sacred fires and the priests required to officiate at the obsequies, logs of
sandalwood, various types of firewood, pieces of fragrant aloe-wood, odorous perfumes, as well as
gems, pearls and corals.

Surrounded with demons, he came back for a while and thereupon, Vibhishana along
with malyavan (the father of his own mother) initiated the obsequies.

Placing Ravana, the lord of demons, who was covered with linen, accompanied by
blasts of various musical instruments as well as panegyrists singing his the Brahmanas (forming
part of the demon's race, which was apparently divided into four classes, like human beings) stood
around him with their faces filled in tears. Lifting up that palanquin, which had been decorated
with colorful flags and flowers and taking up blocks of wood, all the demons for their part, with
Vibhishana in front, proceeded with their face turned towards the south.

Those sacrificial fires were ignited and re-animated, as they were, by Adhvaryu
priests, the performers of the sacrificial act, at that time. Those sacrificial fires were
contained in earthen pots and went in front of Ravana's body.

All those women of the gynaecium, while weeping, followed at his heels with quick
paces, stumbling, as they were, on all sides.

Keeping the body of Ravana on a consecrated spot, Vibhishana and others, who were
very much afflicted with grief, piled up a sacred pyre, with logs of sandalwood, moistened with
perfumes called Padmaka and Koshira and covered with the skin of black antelopes, turned about to
perform the obsequies in accordance with Vedic rites in honour of the king.

They performed the ancestral oblations to Ravana in a superb way. They constructed
an altar in the south-east the funeral pile) and placed the sacred fire in its proper place.

They poured a ladle-full of ghee mixed with curds on his shoulders, placed a cart at
his feet and then a wooden mortar at his thighs.

Having set at their proper place, all the wooden vessels (used in Agnihotra), the
lower piece of wood used for kindling fire at a sacrifice and the upper piece of wood (which is
rotated at great speed on to lower one, to produce fire by friction), the wooden pestle and other
things used in the sacrifice, they circled around the funeral pyre.

According to ordinance laid down by eminent sages and according to the rules viewed
in Vedas, having sacrificed a goat fit for sacrifice at that spot, the demons dampened with ghee on
Ravana the King of demons.

Having decorated the body of Ravana with perfumes, garlands and various kinds of
clothes; those demons accompanied by Vibhishana, distressed as they were in their minds, poured
parched grains of rice, with their faces bathed in tears.

That Vibhishana set fire to Ravana, according to the rules in the scriptures.
Washing himself and offering in his wet clothes, according to scriptural ordinance, sesame seeds
mixed with water, as well as blades of Kusha grass and offering obeisance to Ravana by bowing his
head, Vibhishana entreated those women to return, consoling them again and again. Then, all of the
returned to the City.

When those women were re-entering the City, Vibhishana the lord of demons on
approaching Rama's vicinity then remained standing there with humility.

Having destroyed the enemy, Rama too experienced happiness, along with his army as
well as with Sugreeva and Lakshmana, even as Indra the wielder of thunderbolt did on destroying
Vritra the demon.

Thereupon, taking off his bow and arrows as also that great armour endowed to him by
Indra, Rama the annihilator of his enemies, taking off his anger too, because of the enemy's
defeat, then obtained a charming benevolence.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Placing his hallowed hands together on his head (as a mark of salutation), Bharata
the enhancer of Kaikeyi's happiness, spoke to the truly brave Rama, his elder brother (as
follows):

"You gave this kingdom to me and treated my mother's words respectfully. As you gave
it to me then, in the same way I am giving it to you again.

I cannot carry this heavy burden anymore than a young ox would sustain a load,
carried forward by a strong bull all alone."

"I think this venerable point in the form of administration of the kingdom is
difficult to be controlled, as a broken dam, seeping from its cracks when breached mammoth stream
of water.

O hero, the annihilator of enemies! I am not able to follow your path, any more than
a donkey would follow the gallop of a horse or a crow would take up the chase of a wild goose."

"O mighty armed king! How a tree planted in the back yard of one's own house, even
though grown big and difficult to climb with a huge trunk and large branches, does not yield fruits
but dries up after flowering, he who planted it would not enjoy the fruit for which it was planted.
This is the analogy applied to you, if you, as a Master, would not indeed rule over us, your
servants. You can understand the meaning."

"O Rama! Today, let the world see you when crowned, like the sun with its glowing
splendour, shining brilliantly at noon.

May you relax and wake-up too, to the sounds of an ensemble of musical instruments,
the tinkling of ornaments strung with tiny bells and worn around the waist and anklets as well as
sweet invocation of songs.

Look after, you, lordship of world here, as long as the stellar sphere revolves and
so far as the earth is spread out."

Hearing the words of Bharata, Rama who conquered the cities of adversaries, accepted
his words saying "Be it so" and sat on an auspicious seat.

Thereafter, on instructions from Shatrughna, skilled barbers with gentle hands who
can do their work with a good speed, encircled Rama all round.

Bharata, having bathed first, the mighty Lakshmana, Sugreeva the lord of monkeys and
Vibhishana the king of demons took bath. Rama had his matted locks disentangled and bathed. He
stood there, shining with splendour, adorned with picturesque garlands, smeared with sandal pastes
of various colours and clothed in costly raiment.

Shatrughna, the valiant and charming man, the promoter of Ikshvaku dynasty made
arrangements for personal adornment of Rama and Lakshmana.

Then, all the noble-minded widows of Dasaratha indeed themselves personally adorned
Seetha beautifully.

Thereupon, the delightful Kausalya, who was affectionate of her sons, adorned with
zeal all the wives of monkeys.

Later, on the orders of Shatrughna, the charioteer by name Sumantra made his
appearance, yoking chariot to horses which were completely beautiful in all respects.

Seeing the charming chariot, which emitted immaculate splendour like that of the
sun, standing before him, the mighty armed Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities, ascended it.

Sugreeva and Hanuma, having splendour similar to that of Indra the lord of
celestials, after taking their bat, wore beautiful raiment as well as sparkling ear rings and
started.

Endowed with all types of ornaments as well as charming ear-rings, those wives of
Sugreeva together with Seetha moved out, longing as they were, to see the city.

In Ayodhya, the ministers of king Dasaratha, having placed the priest in their
front, planned everything meaningfully.

Ashoka, Vijaya and Siddhartha, with a great concern, discussed about Rama's
advancement and the prosperity of the City.

"You ought to do auspiciously whatever is required for the coronation of the
great-souled Rama, worthy of victory."

Advising the priest in this way, all those ministers quickly started from the city,
with an intention to see Rama.

The faultless Rama, mounting the excellent chariot, as Indra ascended the chariot
yoked to green-coloured horses, sallied forth to the city.

Bharata took up the reins. Shatrughna held the parasol on Rama's head. Lakshmana
winnowed a fan. Vibhishana, the king of demons standing nearby, held a white fan, shining
brilliantly like the moon.

Then, in the sky, groups of sages, celestials along with troop of the Maruts, the
host of the gods, praised Rama and sweet reverberation was heard.

Thereupon, Sugreeva, the foremost of monkeys, possessing a great splendor, mounted
an elephant named Shatrunjaya, looking like a mountain.

Assuming human forms and adorned with all types of ornaments, monkeys sallied forth,
mounting on mine thousand elephants.

Rama, the foremost among men, accompanied by sounds of conches buzzing in the ears
and sounds of kettle-drums, proceeded to the city of Ayodhya, having a series of palaces.

Then, the people of Ayodhya saw Rama, the chariot warrior, having a beautiful form,
arriving on a chariot, with attendants walking in front.

Felicitating Rama and greeted in reciprocation by Rama, they followed the great
souled Rama, who was surrounded by his brothers.

Surrounded by ministers, brahamanas and other citizens, Rama shone with his own
brilliance, like the moon among the stars.

That Rama drove, surrounded by musicians having musical instruments cymbals and
Swastika-musical instruments in their hands walking in front and uttering auspicious songs.

Men with grains of rice mixed with turmeric and thereby appearing gold in colour,
cows, maidens along with brahmanas having balls of sweets in their hands, walked in front of
Rama.

Then, Rama narrated about his friendship established with Sugreeva, the power of
Hanuma and the great act of monkeys to his ministers.

Hearing the well-known achievement monkeys and the commonly known strength of the
demons, the citizens of Ayodhya were astonished.

Then, Rama spoke to his counselors about his meeting with Vibhishana. After
recounting it, the resplendent Rama entered Ayodhya crowded with happy and rejoiced people,
together with the monkeys.

Then, the citizens hoisted flags on every house. Rama reached the beautiful palace,
paternal occupied by Ikshvaku kings.

Approaching and entering the palace of the great-souled father, Rama the prince
offered salutation to Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi and spoke the following sweet and meaningful
words to Bharata, the foremost among the righteous:

"Give this great palace of mine which looks excellent with Ashoka garden and
consisting of pearls and cat's eye-gems to Sugreeva for his stay."

Hearing those words of Rama, Bharata having a true prowess, holding Sugreeva by his
hand, entered that house.

Thereupon, some men as ordered by Shatrughna, quickly brought oil lamps, beds as
also mats and entered the house.

Bharata of great splendour spoke to Sugreeva as follows: "O capable person! Order
the messengers to make arrangements for Rama's coronation."

Sugreeva then gave four golden jars encrusted with jewels, to four leaders of
monkeys.

"O monkeys! Get ready in such a way that you await my orders tomorrow at dawn, with
your water-jars filled with water from the four oceans respectively."

The great souled monkeys, resembling elephants and going speedily like eagles, thus
ordered by Sugreeva, leapt quickly into the sky.

Jambavan, Hanuma, a monkey called Vegadarshi and Rishabha brought water-jars filled
with water. They brought water from five hundred rivers with those jars.

Thereafter, the energetic SusheNa brought a jar, adorned with all types of precious
stones, filled with water from the eastern sea.

Rishabha brought water quickly from the southern sea in a golden jar, covered with
some stems of red sandal-wood tree.

Gavaya, having a pace as rapid as wind, brought cool water from the western ocean,
in a large jar set with jewels.

That virtuous Nala, who vied with Garuda (the king of birds) and the wind-god in
prowess, and who was endowed with all good qualities, swiftly brought water form the northern
sea.

Then, Shatrughna, accompanied by the counsellors, reported to Vasishta, their chief
priest and his friends, about that water intended for Rama's coronation brought by those foremost
of monkeys.

The elderly Vasistha, with diligence, along with other brahmins on his side,
prevailed upon Rama duly to occupy along with Seetha, on a seat made of precious stones.

Vasishta, Vamadeva, Kashyapa, Katyayana, Suyajna, Gautama and Vijaya consecrated
Rama the tiger among men, with clear and fragrant water, as the eight Vasus*

Vasishta and others, with much delight got him consecrated first, with brahmanas
officiating as priests and by virgins, ministers, warriors, as well as merchants sprinkling the sap
of all kinds of medicinal herbs, with the four gods the guardians of the worlds, standing in the
air and with all the gods assembled there, sprinkling the sap on Rama.

With which crown, long ago, Manu the emperor was adorned while he was consecrated
and with which, the kings followed in his line were successively adorned while they were coronated,
that crown studded with precious jewels, fashioned by Brahma at the beginning of creation and
dazzling with splendour, being kept according to practice on a throne adorned with many kinds of
precious stones in the council-hall, studded with gold, graced with abundant riches, decorated and
shiningly made with most charming jewels of various kinds, and thereafter Rama duly adorned by that
crown as well as jewels by the great-souled Vasishta and other priests officiating at the
coronation-ceremony.

Shatrughna held over him, a white and charming parasol; Sugreeva the king of
monkeys, a white whisk and vibhishana the lord of demons, another whisk shining like the moon.

Encouraged by Indra, the lord of celestials, the wind-god presented to Rama, a
golden garland consisting of a hundred lotuses and which looked shining brilliantly.

Induced by Indra, the wind-god presented to Rama the king, a chain of pearls,
adorned with gems and endowed with several types of precious stones.

On that occasion of the coronation-ceremony of the intelligent Rama, who was
well-deserving it, the celestial-musicians among the celestials gracefully sang and troupes of
Apsaras (celestial nymphs) danced.

On the occasion of that merriment of coronation to Rama, the earth was bearing a
rich crop, the trees were laden with fruits and fragrant flowers.

Rama the foremost among men, first gave away to Brahmanas, a hundred thousand horses
and cows that have lately calved as well as a hundred bulls.

Rama again gave to Brahmanas, thirty crores of gold coins, all kinds of very costly
jewels and raiment.

Rama gave to Sugreeva, a beautiful chaplet, studded with plenty of gems, looking
like a beam of sun-light.

The joyful Rama presented to Angada, the son of Vali, a bracelet worn on upper arm,
conspicuously studded with cat's eye gems and adorned with jewels and gems.

Rama presented to Seetha, an excellent string of pearls, furnished with superior
gems, shining like a beam of moon-light; two clean and beautiful raiment and lovely ornaments.

Looking towards Hanuma the monkey, Seetha, daughter of Janaka, having taken off the
pearl-string from her neck, repeatedly caught the glimpse of all the monkeys and her husband.

Looking at her, Rama who was acquainted with the gesture of another spoke to Seetha
as follows: "Dear Seetha! Give the pearl-necklace to a person, with whom you are pleased and in
whom the following viz. sharpness, firmness, renown, dexterity, competence, modesty, prudence,
virility, prowess and intelligence are ever present."

The black-eyed Seetha gave that pearl necklace to Hanuma. Hanuma, the foremost among
the monkeys, by wearing that necklace, which was as white as a heap of moonlight-beams, shone
brilliantly as a mountain silvered by a white cloud.

All the elder ones among the monkeys and others, who were foremost among the moneys,
were honoured suitably with raiment and ornaments.

Thereafter, Rama the tormentator of enemies, having thought over, presented articles
according to their inclinations, to Mainada, Dvivida and Nila.

Rama, who was unwearied in action, then suitably honoured Vibhishana, Sugreeva,
Hanuma, Jamabavan and all other eminent monkeys with desired objects and abundant gifts. All of
them went back, delighted in mind even as they had come.

Thereafter, all those excellent great souled monkeys, offering their salutation to
Rama and getting permission from him, returned to Kishkindha.

Having seen Rama's coronation-ceremony, Sugreeva the chief of monkeys, after getting
honoured by Rama, entered the city of Kishkindha.

The righteous and the renowned king Vibhishana too, after obtaining the treasure of
his race (kingdom of demons), followed by those foremost of demons, returned to Lanka.

That renowned Rama, of a very generous nature, having destroyed his enemies and
ruling the entire kingdom, enjoyed it with a great delight. Rama, affectionate of righteousness,
spoke to Lakshmana, the knower of righteousness (as followers):

"O Lakshmana, the knower of what is right! Rule with me, this earth, as ruled by the
earlier kings, with the help of an army. Installed in the office of Prince Regent, bear like me,
the burden (of sovereignty), which was borne by our forefathers."

When Lakshmana did not give his consent, even though being repeatedly entreated in
all ways, nay even being appointed to the office of Prince Regent, the great-souled Rama thereupon
consecrated Bharata.

Rama propitiated the gods by performing Paundarika, Ashvamedha, Vajapeya and other
sacrifices many times.

Having enjoyed the kingship for ten thousand years, Rama performed a hundred
horse-sacrifices, in which good horses were sacrificed and numerous gifts bestowed.

That Rama, having his long arms reaching down his knees, having a broad chest and
glorious, ruled this earth with Lakshmana as his companion.

Obtaining a very great kingdom the righteous Rama propitiated the almighty with many
kinds of sacrifices, with the team-work of his sons, brothers and relatives.

While Rama was ruling the kingdom, there were no widows to lament, nor there was no
danger from wild animals, nor any fear born of diseases.

The world was bereft of thieves and robberies. No one felt worthless nor did old
people perform obsequies concerning youngsters.

Every creature felt pleased. Every one was intent on virtue. Turning their eyes
towards Rama alone, creatures did not kill one another.

While Rama was ruling the kingdom, people survived for thousands of years, with
thousands of their progeny, all free of illness and grief.

While Rama ruled the kingdom, the talks of the people centered round Rama, Rama and
Rama. The world became Rama's world.

The trees there were bearing flowers and fruits regularly, without any injury by
pests and insects. The clouds were raining in time and the wind was delightful to the touch.

Brahmins (the priest-class), Kshatriyas (the warrior-class), Vaishyas (the class of
merchants and agriculturists), Shudras (the servant-class) were performing their own duties,
satisfied with their own work and bereft of any greed. While Rama was ruling, the people were
intent on virtue and lived without telling lies.

All the people were endowed with excellent characteristics. All were engaged in
virtue. Rama was engaged in the kingship thus for one thousand years.

In this world, whoever person reads and listens to this foremost lyric derived from
the speech of a sage, which is endowed with righteousness, conferring fame and longevity, fetching
victory to kings and as written at first by Valmiki, that person is delivered from all
misfortune.

On hearing the narrative of his coronation in this world, a person seeking for sons
gets sons. A person looking for wealth, gets the riches. A king conquers the earth and overcomes
his enemies.

Even as Kausalya, the mother has Rama as her living son, or as Sumitra has Lakshmana
or as Kaikeyi has Bharata, the women likewise can become mothers of living sons, endowed with
children as well as grand children and thus become happy forever.

On hearing this epic of Ramayana and all the episode of victory of Rama, who was
unweary in his actions, a person gets longevity to life.

He or she, who hears with attention and with a subdued anger, this poetic
composition done by Valmiki long ago, that person overcomes the difficulties.

Whoever hears this poetical composition written by Valmiki long ago, they at the
conclusion of their absence from home, meet their relatives and get rejoiced.

They get all the boons, entreated from Rama. All the gods get pleased with those who
carefully listen to it.

Whoever carefully listens to the epic in his house, all obstacles come to an end. A
king conquers the earth. A person staying away from home, fares well.

On hearing the epic, the menstruating women give birth to excellent sons. The adorer
and the reader of this ancient epic gets relieved of all sins and obtains longer life.

The epic is to be listened by warrior-class, after offering their salutation with
their heads bent low, from brahmins every day regularly. There is no doubt that the listener and
the reader of this entire Ramayana will get lordship and the birth of a son.

Rama gets forever pleased with him who listens to or reads Ramayana daily. He is
indeed the eternal Vishnu, the Lord of preservation. Rama is the primordial Lord, clearly placed
before the eyes the powerful Lord removing the sins and the great-armed, who has abode on waters
(of the ocean of milk) Sesha (the serpent-god forming his couch is said to be Lakshmana.

Tell this epic which occurred long ago in this manner, to those who ask for it,
fearlessly. Let there be happiness to you! Let the strength of Vishnu increase!

By studying and listening to this epic, all the gods get appeased. By listening to
this Ramayana, the forefathers forever get pleased.

To those persons who transcribe with devotion this collection of poems depicting the
story of Rama residence in heaven is assured.

By listening to this highly meaningful and auspicious poetical composition, a person
gets family-prosperity, augmentation in money and grain, superior women, exquisite happiness and
all the acquisition of wealth on this earth.

This narrative is to be listened invariably by good people, seeking for wisdom,
longevity, health, fame, fraternity, intelligence, welfare and brilliance.
undefined
undefined
undefined
Rama, a very bright man and a true warrior, having duly heard the words of Hanuman from 
the beginning, thereafter spoke as follows:
"I shall destroy quickly Lanka, the city of that terrible ogre (Ravana), of which you 
just informed I am really telling this."
"Be pleased to approve our march at this moment, a suitable moment for success. The sun 
reached the mid-day.
"Let that ogre go (to his abode) after kidnapping Seetha. Where will he go alive? Hearing 
of my march to Lanka, Seetha will get back her hope in life, like a sick man having drunk poison touches 
ambrosia at the end of his life."
"This northern planet of Phalguni will be in conjunction with the Hasta star tomorrow. 
Hence, let us depart today itself with all the troops accompanying us, Oh, Sugreeva!"
"By seeing the omens which are becoming visible, I deduce that I shall bring back Seetha 
the daughter of Janaka, by killing Ravana."
"My eye which is twitching on the upper lid, is proclaiming as it were, my desire of 
victory coming nearer."
Then Rama the virtuous man versed in moral law, who was well-adored by Sugreeva the king 
of monkeys and Lakshmana, again spoke as follows:-
"Let general Nila accompanied by strength of hundred thousand warriors go before the 
army, to explore the way."
"Oh Nila the chief of Army! Steer the army speedily by the path, abound with fruits and 
roots, cool woods and fresh water and honey."
"The evil-minded demons may spoil the roots, fruits and water in the path-way. You always 
try to be on you guard."
"Let the monkeys jump into law grounds, into places made inaccessible by forest-grores 
and into thickets and notice whether any rival forces are stationed there."
"Let whatever little of feeble forces stay back in Kishkindha, as our operation will 
indeed be dreadful. It has to be discharged daringly."
"Let the best of monkeys with great strength in hundreds and thousands lead the formidable 
of the army, which is akin to an oceanic stream."
"Let Gaja, equal to a mountain, Gavaya a very strong warrior and Gavaksha march in front, 
as a majestic bull marches in front of a cow-herd."
"Let the monkey called Rishabha, Lord of the simians and the best of the primates march 
forward, duly guarding the right side of the army of the simians."
"Let Gandhamadana, with a strength unconquerable like an elephant in rut, proceed duly 
guarding the left side of the army of monkeys."
"I myself, mounted on the shoulders of Hanuman, like Indra on Airavata, will march in 
the centre of my troops, duly cheering the multitude of army."
"Let this Lakshmana, resembling the lord of Death, march on the shoulders of Angada like 
Kubera the lord of riches and the sovereign of beings marches on an elephant called Sarvabhauma."
Let the highly strong, Jambavan with Sushena and the monkey called Vegadarshi, all three, 
guard the middle part of the army."
"Hearing the words of Rama, Sugreeva with great valour, the commander of forces and the 
lion among monkeys gave orders to the monkeys accordingly."
Then, all those troops of monkeys with great speed together raised up and quickly bounced 
from caves and mountain-tops.
Thereafter Rama the virtuous man, treated respectfully by Sugreeva and Lakshmana, moved 
towards southern direction, along with the army.
At that time, Rama went surrounded by monkeys, looking like elephants, numbering in hundreds, 
hundreds of thousands and crores.
That extensive army of monkeys followed Rama who was marching in the lead. All those 
monkeys maintained by Sugreeva were rejoicing with delight.
The monkeys, jumping overwhelmingly with roaring sound and jest fully playing musical 
instruments (like trumpets) marched towards southern direction.
They marched on, eating good-smelling honeys and fruits and carrying large branches bearing 
clusters of blossoms in multitude.
Wild monkeys would lift up and throw one another all of a sudden. Some others were hanging 
down and flying upwards. Some other monkeys were throwing down others.
Monkeys close to Rama were thus shouting, "To us, Ravana is worthy of killing and also 
the entire demons."
Rishabha, Nila, and the courageous Kumuda along with many monkeys were clearing up the 
path ahead.
Sugreeva the king of monkeys, Rama and Lakshmana the destroyers of enemies were moving 
in the centre along with many robust and terrible monkeys.
The heroic monkey satabali who was accompanied by ten crores of monkeys, standing alone 
firmly, guarded the whole army of monkeys.
Kesari with a retinue of a hundred crore, Panasa, Gaja and Arka along with many monkeys 
were protecting one flank of that army.
Keeping Sugreeva in front, Sushena and Jambavanta surrounded by many bears, protected 
the hinder part of that army.
Nila their chief of the army, the brave and the best among monkeys, the self controlled 
and the foremost among movable beings, was protecting atha army in every direction.
Valimukha, Prajangha, Jambha and Rabhasa the monkey were moving on all sides, urging 
the monkeys forward.
Those foremost among the monkeys, proud of their strength, thus marching with the army, 
saw the Sahya mountain the best of mountains joined with many small mountains, lakes fully abounding 
in flowers and eminent ponds.
That large army of monkeys, terrific like an ocean-flood cognizing the command of Rama 
which is frightfully enraging, having terror-stricken, abandoning the vicinity of towns and even villages, 
marched like a highly dreadful ocean with a great hoaring sound.
All those prominent and valiant monkeys were overwhelmingly jumping ahead, like fine 
horses being whipped, at the side of that Rama.
Rama and Lakshmana the best among men being carried on shoulders by Hanuman and Angada 
the two monkeys, were effulgent like the moon and the sun having come together in contact with two large 
planets (Jupiter and Venus).
Thereafter, Rama the virtuous man, treated respectfully by Sugreeva and Lakshmana, moved 
towards southern direction, along with the army. Lakshmana, with a fully meaningful presence of mind, 
sitting on Angada, spoke the following auspicious words which were fully meaningful, to Rama.
"Killing Ravana fast and obtaining Seetha who was taken away, you will proceed to Ayodhya 
which is abundant by rich, having accomplished your purpose."
"I am seeing all grand good omens in the sky and the earth self-evident of your fulfillment, 
Oh Rama! The wind which is favorable, gentle beneficial and comfortable to the army is blowing alongside."
"These beasts and birds are uttering sonorous and sweet sounds. All the quarters are 
looking bright. Even the sun is clear."
"The planet of Venus with its bright light, born from the sage Bhrigu (a mind-born son 
of Brahma the creator) is hanging behind you. Dhruva, the very bright pole-star (which is recognized 
by the contiguity of the stars presided over by the seven Brahmana sages) is becoming clear. All the 
pure great sages having bright light are shining are shining around Dhruva star.
"The royal sage Trishanku, our paternal grand father, born in the high-souled Ikshvaku 
dynasty, is purely shining (as a star) in front, along with his family-priest."
"Visakha stars are shining clearly without any evil influence. This supreme constellation 
is of our Ikshvakus, the high-souled."
"The Mula constellation of the titans is badly aspected, in that it is touched by a comet 
risen with a tail of light and tormented by it."
"All this has come for the destruction of the titans, for, the star seized by death is 
oppressed by a planet in its last hour."
"The waters are crystal-clear, with good taste. The woodlands are laden with fruit. The 
fragrant air is not blowing much. Trees are bearing seasonal flowers."
"The armies of monkeys formed into different squadrons are looking highly splendid like 
the armies of celestials in the battle in which the demon Taraka was killed, Oh venerable one! Be pleased 
to see these good omens in this manner."
The delighted Lakshmana spoke thus, cheering up his brother. Then, the army of monkeys 
consisting of excellent bears and monkeys having their very nails and teeth as weapons, marched ahead, 
covering the entire earth.
The aweful dust raised by nails and claws of monkeys obscured the splendor of the sun 
and also covered the earth comprising of mountains forests and the atmosphere. The colossal monkey-army 
advanced, encompassing the southern region like a mass of cloud enveloping the sky.
While the army was crossing the entire river-currents uninterruptedly, the currents flowed 
invertedly for a distance of many yojanas.
The mighty army entered thoroughly into lakes containing clear water, mountains full 
of trees, plain-landed territories and forests laden with fruits from the middle, from the four sides, 
from across and from under.
The gigantic army marched, thoroughly covering the land. All of them with a wind-like 
aped went on, manifesting a joy in their faces.
For the sake of Rama, the monkeys with fully elevated pace vied with each other in high 
spirits, vigor and prowess. Out of pride born of prime youth, some made various gestures on the way.
Some wild monkeys there walked very speedily. In that manner, some others hovered highly. 
Some made noises, sounding "kila! kila!".
Some monkeys lashed their tails. Some even stamped their feet. Some others, stretching 
their arms, broke off rocks and trees.
Some monkeys ascended mountain-peaks and uttered huge noises. Some others made lion's 
roars.
Some monkeys were crushing many webs of creepers by the jerks of their thighs. The valiant 
monkeys also played with rocks and trees, by stretching their limbs.
In that place, the land was covered splendidly by hundreds of thousands, by thousands 
and crores of monkeys, who were looking very dreadful.
That extensive monkey-army was marching day and night. All the monkeys ruled by Sugreeva 
were exceedingly pleased and cheerful. All were marching quickly, rejoicing for war. Those monkeys desirous 
of Seetha's release, did not halt even for a moment anywhere.
Then, those monkeys reached and climbed up a mountain called sahya with a full canopy 
of trees and filled with many kinds of beasts.
Rama too went along, seeing the wonderful woods, streams and cascades of Sahya and Malaya 
mountains.
The monkeys enjoyed the fruits of Champaka, Tilaka, mango, Praseka, Sindnvaara Timisa 
and Karaveera trees.
The monkeys enjoyed Ashoka, Karanja, Plaksa, Nyagrodha, Jambu, myrobalan and Naga trees.
Various kinds of forest-trees standing on enchanting plateaus, being shaken by gust of 
winds, poured out flowers on those monkeys.
A soft-touching breeze, refreshing as a sandal, blew while the bees hummed in the nectar-scented 
woods.
That royal Sahya Mountain was highly adorned with red-coloured metal. The dust blown 
from that metal by the velocity of wind, coming forth from all sides, obscured the huge monkey-army.
On the lovely mountain slopes, in blossom on all sides, Ketaki and Sindhuvara trees, 
the charming Vasanti, Madhavi creepers with flowers full of scent, clumps of jasmine, Chiribila, Madhuka, 
Vanjula and Vakula, Ranjanka and Tilaka, Nyavriksha all in flower, Mango, Patalike, Kovidara in flower, 
Muchulinda, Arjuna, Simsapa and Kutaja, Hintala, Timisa, Chirna and Nipa, blue Ashoka, Sarala, Ankola 
and Padmaka all these trees were crawled in excitement by the monkeys who were delighted.
There were delightful wells with stairs and ponds in that mountain, sought after by chakravaka 
birds, frequented by karandava birds, crowded with water-fowls and cranes, visited by boars and deer, 
haunted on all sides by bears, hyenas, lions and many dreadful tigers. There were beautiful reservoirs 
of water with blossoming blue lotuses, water lilies, white water lilies, black water lilies and various 
other kinds of aquatic flowers.
Various kinds of birds sang in those mountain-peaks. Monkeys bathed in water, drank those 
waters and played. They ascended the mountain and got drenched in water, by sprinkling water by one 
over the other among themselves.
Monkeys in mad rut plucked sweet-smelling fruits, roots and flowers there.
Those monkeys, in reddish brown colour like honey, drinking honey from honey-combs weighing 
about a maund each, went on cheerfully.
Those foremost among the monkeys marched, breaking off trees, pulling along creepers 
and throwing away excellent mountains.
Some other monkeys, well-pleased with honey got from trees, yelled loudly. Some others 
reached trees to get honey. Some others were drinking honey excessively.
The earth filled with those excellent monkeys, was like land filled with ripened fields 
of paddy.
Then, the lotus-eyed and the mighty-armed Rama reached Mahendra mountain and ascended 
its top, adorned with trees.
Then, Rama the son of Dasartha mounted the peak and saw an ocean ruffled with water and 
scattered well with turtles and fishes.
They crossed Sahya mountain and Malaya mountain and systematically approached the ocean 
having terrific sound.
Rama the foremost of those who entrance the mind, together with Sugreeva and Lakshmana 
quickly descended the mountain and went to the excellent woodland adjoining the sea.
Then Rama reached the extensive ocean with rocks underneath washed by floods of water 
risen vehemently and spoke these words.
"Oh, Sugreeva! We have reached the abode of Varuna. We should consider now the matter 
(of how to cross the ocean) with which we were formerly preoccupied."
"This ocean, the lord of Rivers, is shore less beyond. This sea is impossible to be crossed 
without a proper strategy."
"For this reason, let the military be assembled here only. Here, let us discuss the plan 
how this military of monkeys will reach the other shore."
Rama, the mighty armed, emaciated due to taking away of Seetha, then reached the sea 
and ordered thus for the halt of the army there.
"Let all the army be stationed at the sea-shore, Sugreeva! Here, the time has come for 
us to think about the subject of crossing the ocean."
"Let not anyone slip away in any direction, leaving his respective unit of army. Let 
valiant monkeys make a more and it should be known whether there is a hidden danger for us."
Hearing Rama's words, Sugreeva along with Lakshmana made the army to halt at the sea-shore, 
stretched with trees.
That army, stationed at the vicinity of the ocean, shined like a second ocean splendid 
with yellowish white honey-coloured water.
There, those foremost of monkeys reached the woodlands at the shore and settled down, 
desiring to reach the other shore of the vast sea.
While all the monkeys were halting there, the noise created out of their movement was 
dominantly heard, concealing the roar of the sea.
That army of the monkeys ruled by Sugreeva, stationed as three divisios (viz. 1. bears 
2. long tailed monkes and 3. monkeys) looked fully dedicated to the cause of Rama.
That army of monkeys reached the mighty ocean and was delighted to behold the mighty 
ocean being diffused by the velocity of wind.
Seeing the sea, the abode of Varuna, which was boundless and having the opposite shore 
far off, inhabitd by a number of demons, the monkey-troups sat down there.
Rendered appalling by the ferocity of fierce alligators and crocodiles, that ocen with 
its foaming waves at the end of the day and at the beginning of the night, appeared to laugh and dance.
The ocean surged, when the moon rose. The image of moon was reflected limitlessly in 
it. The sea was full of huge alligators swift as fierce winds along with whales and great fish.
That sea, the abode of Varuna was filled with serpents bestowed with flaming hoods, plunged 
with mighty aquatic creatures, abounding in various types of mountains, too difficult to cross, with 
an inaccessible path, suffocationly fathomless and an abode of demons.
Increasing waves of the sea in which sharks and bodies of serpents swarmed, rose and 
fell whipped into motion by the breeze.
Emitting whirled sparkles, shining with large water-snakes, a fearful abode of enemies 
of gods forever, the sea reaches upto the uneven Patala (subterranean region).
The ocean looked like the sky. The sky looked like the ocean. The ocean and the sky looked 
alike without any distinction.
The water blended with sky and the sky blended with water. Filled with stars above and 
the pearls below, both the sky and the sea looked with the same splendour.
There was no distinction between the two, of the sea filled with a row of waves and of 
the sky with a row of falling clouds.
The waves of the ocean together banging one another with a terrific resonance, sounded 
like a kettle-drum in the sky.
Those high-souled monkeys saw the sea lashed with winds, resonating with abundance of 
precious stones and water, rising high as if enraged in a grip of hurricane, filled with a number of 
aquatic creatures and tossed by them in the air by seemingly murmuring waves.
The standing monkeys were struck with amazement to see the ocean seemed moving, full 
of resonance produced by a multitude of dashing waves rolling to and fro.
undefined
undefined
undefined

While Prahasta the Army chief of demons was slain in the battle by Nila the foremost
among the monkeys, Ravana's army possessing terrible arms took to flight with the speed of a
tide.

The demons went and told Ravana that Prahasta the Army chief had been killed by Nila
the son of Fire-god. Hearing those words of the demons, Ravana was possessed of anger.

Hearing that Prahasta had perished in the fight, Ravana was afflicted with anger and
his heart filled with grief and he addressed the foremost of his leaders as Indra the Lord of
celestials to the leaders of the celestial troops (as follows):

"That enemy is not to be despised; under whose blows the destroyer of Indra's host
the leader of my army with his followers and elephants fell."

"I myself shall go to that wonderful battle-front without hesitation in order to
destroy the enemies and to gain victory."

"As a forest is consumed by blazing fires, so shall I scorch that army of monkeys
now along with Lakshmana and Rama with a multitude of arrows. Today, I shall satiate the earth with
the blood of the monkeys."

Speaking thus, Ravana the enemy of the Lord of celestials ascended his chariot which
shone like a flame and was yoked to a team of excellent horses with its brilliance of an effulgent
body.

Ravana the best among the kings of demons sallied forth with the sound of couches,
kettle-drums, cymbals, clapping of hands and leonine roars and well-acclaimed by agreeable
encomiums.

That Ravana along with the flesh-eating demons whose forms resembled mountains and
clouds and whose glances flashed like torches shone like Rudra the Lord of Immortals surrounded by
genii.

Ravana who was endowed with extraordinary energy, issuing all at once from the city,
observed a ferocious army of monkeys with trees and rocks in their hands, ready for combat and
roaring like a vast ocean and a mass of thunder-clouds.

Seeing that army of demons who were excessively furious, Rama whose arms resembled
great serpents, accompanied by his forces and having great fortune, spoke to Vibhishana the best
among the wielders of weapons (as follows):

"Who is in command of this army, furnished with every kind of standard, banner and
canopy, armed with javelins, swords, stakes and other weapons and missiles and composed of
imperturbable soldiers and elephants as high as the Mahendra Mountain?"

Hearing the words of Rama, Vibhishana the equal of Indra in valour, then narrated to
Rama about the choicest army of the foremost among demons of the highest peculiarity (as
follows):

"O Prince! That hero who has a face with a coppery hue resembling a newly rising
sun, coming on the back of an elephant causing its head to sway, know him to be Akampana."

"He who, standing in his chariot, brandish his bow which has a splendour of Indra's
bow, whose standard bears the image of a lion, and who shines like unto an elephant with its
terrible curved tusks, he is Indrajit who is renowned for the boons he had received from
Brahma."

"He who, the archer like unto the Vindhya, Asta or Mahendra Mountains, standing in
his chariot, a mighty warrior, of superior strength, who wields a bow of unequalled size and having
an exceedingly grown body, he is called Atikaya."

"He who, with tawny eyes resembling the dawn, riding an elephant with its bells
jangling, who is shouting aloud, he is that strong demon of the highest peculiarity is called
Mahodara."

"He who, ascending the brilliantly caparisoned horse raising high a gleaming
javelin, possesses a velocity of a well-directed thunder-bolt and resembles a mass of evening
clouds and a mountain, he is Pishacha."

"He who, seizing a sharp spike with a possesses the velocity of a well-directed
thunder bolt and comes mounting on an excellent bull which shines like a moon, he is the
illustrious Trishiras."

"The other resembling a thunder-bolt, of large and well-developed chest, who has an
attentive mind, has the King of Snakes as his standard, who is moving and twanging his bow, he is
Kumbha."

"He who, holding a mace decorated with gold and diamonds, which are radiant (as
fire) and also smoky (studded with sapphires), who advances as a standard bearer tot he army of
demons, he is Nikumbha of Prodigious exploits."

"He who, mounted in a chariot, adorned with flags, gleaming like a glowing blazer,
who is furnished with bows swords and a multitude of arrows, he is Narantaka who shines brightly
over there and who, in combat, fights with mountain-tops."

"He who, surrounded by ghosts of dreadful form of rolling eyes, with heads of
tigers, buffalo mighty elephants, deer and horses, under an excellent white canopy with slender
ribs and shining like a moon, he who is the humbler of the gods themselves, shining like unto Rudra
amidst the genii, is the suzerain Lord of Demons there."

"Ravana, decked with a diadem, who has brought Indra the Lord of celestials and
Vaivasvata the Lord of Death low, is shining like the sun. His countenance is graced by ear-rings.
His formidable stature equals the Vindhya the Lord of Mountains."

Then, Rama the annihilator of enemies, answered Vibhishana and said "Alas! What
glory, what majesty is Ravana's the Lord of Demons!

"Ravana is beaming like the sun with his rays difficult to be gazed, neither can the
eye rest on him such is the binding strength of his magnificence!"

"The body of celestial or demonical heroes may not be so radiant in this manner as
this body of the king of demons."

"All the warriors of the suzerain Ravana are as high as hills. All fight with
mountains. All wield fiery weapons."

"Amidst the fiery ghosts of terrible aspect, this king of demons shines like Yama
the Lord of Death surrounded by blazing genii endowed with hideous forms."

"By good luck, that wretch comes today within my range of sight! Today, I shall
expunge my wrath, born of Seetha's abduction!"

Having spoken thus, the valiant Rama who was accompanied by Lakshmana, took up his
bow and then standing erect, drew out an excellent arrow.

Thereafter, that powerful Ravana spoke to those exceedingly strong demons as
follows: "Take up your positions unfalteringly and happily at the gates and principal exits, the
outposts and fortifications."

"Learning of my presence along with you here, taking this to be a weak point and
storming this desolate city which is otherwise difficult to be overpowered, the monkeys when united
may destroy it by surprise."

Having dismissed those counsellors and as the demons departed as ordered, Ravana
thereafter began to split under the waters of the sea of monkeys, in the same way as a gigantic
fish would rend the entire expanse of the sea.

Seeing Ravana with his radiant bow, in the battle, Sugreeva the Lord of Monkeys
tearing up a huge mountain-top, ran towards that king of demons.

Seizing a mountain-top with its many trees and ridges, Sugreeva hurled it on Ravana
the demon. Seeing that mountain-top coming towards him, Ravana quickly broke it asunder with his
arrows with golden shafts.

While that mountain-top with its well-developed ridges and excellent trees was rent
asunder and fell on the earth, Ravana like unto another Yama the Lord of Death, loosed an arrow
resembling a great serpent.

The enraged Ravana, taking that arrow with the speed of a thunder bolt of Indra the
Lord of celestials and possessing the brilliance of a fire, hurled it to kill Sugreeva.

That arrow released by Ravana's arm reached Sugreeva, having a bodily splendour
equal to that of Indra's thunder bolt, and pierced his body in its flight as formerly Guha's spear
when he discharged it at the Krauncha Mountain.

Wounded by that arrow, which bereft him of consciousness, that warrior fell moaning
to the earth. Beholding him falling on the ground, deprived of his senses in the battle-field, the
demons raised a shout of triumph.

Then, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena, Rishabha, Jyotimukha and Nala; of exceeding
corpulence tearing up rocks, rushed towards Ravana.

That Lord of Demons, with hundreds of arrows, possessed of sharp points, rendered
their projectiles fruitless and pierced those leaders of the monkeys with a multitude of marvellous
golden shafted arrows.

Pierced by the arrows of Ravana the Enemy of Gods, those monkey-Generals of
terrifying stature fell on the ground. Thereupon, he covered that formidable army of monkeys with a
shower of arrows.

Assailed and fallen down, those monkey-warriors, emitted cries as though struck by
an arrow of terror, whom Ravana was destroying with his darts and fled for refuge to Rama who is
capable of affording protection to all.

Then the high-souled Rama the skilful archer, taking his bow, set out at once.
Lakshmana, however, approaching him with joined palms, spoke very meaningful words follows:

"O, noble Brother! Of my own accord, I am able to kill this wretched Ravana. O,
Lord! I shall slay him. Permit me to do so."

The exceedingly powerful and the truly courageous Rama spoke to that Lakshmana as
follows: "Go, Lakshmana and also be strenuous in this duel."

"Ravana is endowed with great strength and possesses an outstanding prowess during a war. The Three Worlds themselves could not withstand his fury. There is no doubt about it."

"Seek out his weak points and guard against your own. Defend yourself vigilantly
with your eye and bow."

Hearing the words of Rama, Lakshmana embraced him, thereafter offering obeisance and
bidding him farewell, he entered the battle-field.

Lakshmana then saw Ravana with arms as large as the trunks of elephants, who was
brandishing his dreadful and fiery bow, covering those monkeys whose bodies he had severed with a
close rain of darts.

The exceedingly energetic Hanuma, born of Maruta the god of wind, beholding this,
rushed on Ravana in order to bring that rain of arrows to an end.

Approaching his chariot, the sagacious Hanuma lifted his right arm and spoke the
following threatening words to Ravana:

"You have obtained the boon of invulnerability to the celestials, demons, celestial
musicians, ogres and semi-divine beings. But monkeys are a danger to you."

"This five-branched right hand of mine, which I now raise, will rob you of your life
that has long been resident in your body."

Hearing the words of Hanuma, the exceedingly valiant Ravana, his eyes inflamed with
anger, answered.

"Strike quickly without fear, O Monkey! Win eternal renown. Thereafter, I shall
destroy you, after measuring your strength."

Hearing the words of Ravana, Hanuma the son of wind-god spoke the following words:
"Recollect that I have killed your son Aksha already."

Thus spoken, the highly energetic and the valiant Ravana the Lord of Demons struck
Hanuma the son of Anila a violent blow on his chest with the palm of his hand.

Hanuma, thus struck with Ravana's palm, reeled repeatedly. Thereafter the highly
sagacious and illustrious Hanuma secured his balance within a moment and in fury, struck Ravana the
enemy of Immortals with the very palm of his hand.

Under the violent impact of the blow of the mighty Hanuma Ravana shook like a
mountain when the earth trembles.

Beholding Ravana struck in the fight by Hanuma's palm; the sages, monkeys,
semi-divine beings, along with celestials and demons raised a resounding approbation.

Then, the extremely spirited Ravana, having regained his breath, spoke the following
words: "Well done! Well done! O, monkey! You are my adversary, worthy of praise by your
valour!"

Then, Hanuma answered, "O, Ravana! Cursed by that strength since you do still
survive!"

"O, foolish fellow! Why this boasting? Now come, strike me once! My fist is about to
dispatch you to the Abode of Yama the Lord of Death!"

Hearing the words of Hanuma, the powerful Ravana, enraged, his eyes red with fury
and whirling his fist with force knocked it down violently on Hanuma's chest.

Under the shock, Hanuma reeled once again. Seeing that mighty Hanuma exhausted,
Ravana turned his chariot towards Nila.

With his terrific arrows in the likeness of serpents, Ravana the powerful Lord of
Demons pierced the vital parts of his enemy, thus overwhelming Nila the Monkey-general.

Nila, the Army General of Monkeys, tormented by that hail of arrows, with one hand
hurled a great rock at Ravana the king of demons.

Meanwhile, Hanuma of exalted mind, burning with courage, regained his breath and in
his martial ire cried out furiously towards Ravana, the Lord of Demons who occupied in fight with
Nila as follows: "It is not proper to engage in a combat with a person who is already doing a fight
with another."

Then, the mighty Ravana, however, shattered the rock hurled by Nila with seven
pointed arrows and it fell down, crumbling to pieces.

Seeing that rock crumbling to pieces, Nila the Army-general the destroyer of enemies
who resembled the Fire of Time, glowed with fury.

In that fight, Nila hurled Aswakarna trees, Shala trees with extensive flowering,
Chuta trees and other various types of trees.

Ravana, confronting those trees, bursted them and showered a hail of dangerous darts
on Nila the son of Fire-God.

Showered by a multitude of shafts, as from a cloud, the mighty Nila assumed a
diminutive form and leapt on to the point of Ravana's standard.

Seeing Nila the son of Fire-God standing well on the point of his standard, Ravana
inflamed with fury. Then, Nila shouted loudly.

Beholding that monkey sometimes leaping on to the point of Ravana's standard
sometimes on to the tip of his bow and sometimes on to the peak of his diadem, Lakshmana, Hanuma
and Rama were astonished.

The mighty Ravana, amazed at the monkey's agility, seized a marvellous and glowing
arrow called Agneya the weapon of Fire.

Thereafter, those monkeys who felt rejoiced to see Ravana disconcerted at the
agility of Nila and had found an occasion for jubilation, shouted joyously.

Then, provoked by the shouts of the monkeys, his heart possessed with confusing,
Ravana did not know what to do.

Ravana the demon, taking up an arrow, charged with the missile presided over by the
fire-God, aimed at Nila who had perched on the tip of his standard.

Then, Ravana the king of demons said,: "O monkey! You are endowed with agility
combined with a supreme power of magic."

"Do you save your life if you can, eventhogh you are creating numerous deeds of
various kinds indeed worthy of your own self, O, monkey!"

"Even then, the arrow charged with a mystic missile I am about to loose, will severe
you from life, which existence you seek to preserve."

Thus speaking, Ravana the long-armed King of Demons, having placed Agni Missile with
his arrow, struck Nila the Army-General.

Struck on the chest by the arrow combined with a missile, Nila being burnt all over,
suddenly fell to the ground.

Yet by virtue of the powerful aid of his father and his own native vigour, though
brought to his knees on to the earth, he was not deprived of his life.

Seeing Nila unconscious, Ravana, eager for fight, in his chariot whose rattling
sounded like thunder-clouds, rushed on Lakshmana.

Coming to the centre of the battle-field, the powerful Ravana the King of Demons
prevented Lakshmana to go forward, halted, standing there in his glory and lifted up his bow.

Lakshmana of indomitable courage spoke to that Ravana who was lifting up his
unfathomable bow (as follows): "O, King of Demons! Now enter into combat with me; cease from
fighting with the monkeys!"

Hearing that marvellously modulated voice that resounded like the twanging of a
bow-string, Ravana drawing near his adversary, who stood close to his chariot, answered in
anger:

"O, Lakshmana! By my good fortune, you in your perverted mind, reached within my
range of sight so as to meet your death. This very instant, you will go to the region of Death,
after having collapsed by the bang of my rain of arrows."

Then, Lakshmana, unmoved spoke to that Ravana who was roaring with his sharp and
protruding teeth (as follows): "Greatly dignified ones eschew bragging! O, the foremost of
evil-doers! You are sounding your own praises!"

"O, King of Demons! I know your valour, strength, energy and courage! Come! I now
stand here, with my bow and arrows in hand. O what use are vain boasts."

Thus accosted, the King of Demons, infuriated, loosened seven marvellously plumed
arrows which Lakshmana shattered with his beautiful golden-shafted arrows of sharp ends and
edges.

Beholding those arrows shattered like great cobras with their hoods shattered,
Ravana got angry and loosened other sharp arrows.

Lakshmana, however, caused a well-aimed rain of missiles from his bow to fall on
Ravana and nay, even broke Ravana's arrows with his arrows called Khura, Ardhachandra, the
excellent Karni and Bhalla. He did not feel perturbed.

Seeing his successive arrows proving in vain, Ravana the King of those hostile to
Gods was astonished at Lakshmana's skill and released more whetted shafts upon him.

Lakshmana, the equal of Mahendra the Lord of celestials, fixing some sharpened
arrows, swift as lightning and of blazing effulgence on his bow-string, discharged them on Ravana
in order to strike him down.

Whereupon, Ravana the King of Demons shattered those pointed arrows and struck
Lakshmana in the forehead with a struck Lakshmana in the forehead with a shaft as bright as the
Fire of Time, which had been bestowed on him by Brahma the Lord of Creation.

Struck by Ravana's arrow, Lakshmana reeled a little and was scarcely able to retain
his bow. But, coming to his consciousness with difficulty, he shattered that weapon belonging to
Ravana, Indra's enemy.

Then, Lakshmana the son of Dasaratha struck Ravana, whose bow was broken, with three
pointed darts. The king, pierced by those arrows, swooned and regained his senses with
difficulty.

Ravana, the enemy of celestials, whose bow was broken, struck by the arrows, his
limbs spattered with flesh, and streaming with blood, himself of formidable energy, seized in the
battle a spear gifted to him by Brahma the Lord of Creation.

Ravana the Lord of the country of demons hurled with strength on Lakshmana, that
blazing spear, emitting smoke and as bright as fire, frightening the monkeys in the fray.

Lakshmana the younger brother of Bharata struck that weapon falling upon him with
arrows and darts, as if it were a sacrificial fire. Nevertheless, that spear entered Lakshmana's
broad chest.

The mighty Lakshmana, struck by the spear, lay on the earth, breathing fire. The
king, rushing suddenly on him who was yet insensible, seized him brutally in his hands.

Though he was able to lift up Himavat, Mandara and Meru mountains as also the Three
Worlds with the Gods, he could not raise Lakshmana the younger brother of Bharata.

Lakshmana, though wounded in the breast by Brahma's weapon, recollected that he was
an inconceivable fraction of Vishnu Himself.

Ravana that thorn in the side of the Gods, though overcoming that Lakshmana who
removed the pride of demons, was unable to bear him away with his hands.

Thereupon, the enraged Hanuma the son of the Wind-God, rushed towards Ravana and
struck angrily on his chest with his fist, resembling a thunder-bolt.

By that blow of the fist, Ravana the Lord of Demons reeled and fell on his knees to
the ground.

A lot of blood oozed out from his face, eyes, and ears. Reeled and motionless, he
became and sat in the middle of the chariot.

Seeing Ravana despite his redoubtable strength swooned on the battle-field, sages
and monkeys began to shout in triumph as did also celestials and the demons (invisibly present on
the scene).

Then, the courageous Hanuma lifting up Lakshmana in his arms, who had been wounded
by Ravana, brought him to Rama's presence.

That Lakshmana, whom his foes were unable to move, became light for Hanuma because
of friendship and great devotion of Hanuma the son of Wind-God towards him.

That spear leaving Lakshmana, who was overcome in the battle, returned to its
position in that chariot of Ravana.

The mighty Ravana too, regaining his consciousness in the great battle-field, picked
up his sharp arrows and the great bow.

Healed and free from that lance, Lakshmana the annihilator of his foes, recollected
of himself as a part of the inconceivable Vishnu the Lord of Preservation.

Beholding the great army of monkeys whose great warriors were overthrown on the
battle-field, Rama rushed on Ravana.

Meanwhile, Hanuma approaching Rama spoke the following words: "You have to punish
the demon by climbing my back, as Vishnu on Garuda in order to fight with the Enemy of Gods."

Hearing those words spoken by Hanuma the son of Wind-God, Rama soon after mounted
the great monkey, Hanuma. Rama the Lord of men then saw Ravana standing in his chariot in the
battle-field.

The mighty Rama became angry on seeing him and rushed upon that Ravana like unto
Vishnu with his uplifted mace rushed upon Virochana.

Rama made a sound in drawing the cord of his bow and like unto the roll of thunder,
spoke in a deep voice to Ravana as follows:

"O, Tiger among the Demons! Stay, stay! Having evoked such a displeasure to me,
where will you flee and get an abandonment?"

"Even if you seek refuge in the region of Indra the Lord of celestials or Yama the
Lord of Death or the Sun or Brahma the Lord of Creation or Agni the Lord of Fire or Shiva the Lord
of dissolution or in the ten regions, even in those abodes you will elude me from now on."

"O, Ravana the King of Demons! The one who was struck by the spear, fell swooping
this day only to recover consciousness immediately, will now, assuming the form of death, claim
you, your sons and grandsons in battle."

"Here is he, under whose blows of arrows, fourteen thousand demons of terrible form
perished, who had established themselves in Janasthana and were furnished with excellent
weapons."

Hearing the words of Rama, Ravana of great strength, full of rage and recollecting
his former hostility struck with flaming arrows resembling the tongues of the Fire of Dissolution,
on Hanuman the son of Wind-God, who with extreme velocity, was bearing Rama in the
battle-field.

Even when struck by that demon with his arrows in the battle, the vigour of Hanuman,
who was endowed with native strength, increased still further.

Thereupon, seeing Hanuman the Tiger among the monkeys getting wounded by Ravana,
Rama was transported with anger.

Going near his chariot with his sharp and pointed arrows, Rama shattered it along
with its wheels, horses, banner, canopy, great standard, charioteer, darts, spears and swords.

Thereupon, with a great force, Rama struck with his shaft shining brightly as the
thunderbolt, that Ravana, the enemy of Indra, in his broad and beautiful chest, even as the mighty
Indra would strike the Mount Meru with his thunderbolt.

That valiant King of Demons, whom neither thunder nor lightning could cause
disturbance or trembling; stumbled letting fall his bow at the valiant impact of Rama's missile
which created a deep injury.

Seeing that Ravana swooning, the magnanimous Rama took up a blazing arrow shaped
like a crescent moon and immediately used it to shatter the diadem of Ravana the Lord of Demons,
which was of bright hue.

In that battle-field, Rama said to that Lord of Demons whose splendour was dimmed,
the setting of his diadem river, who resembled a venomous snake robbed of its poison or like a sun
its rays extinguished, bereft of lustre.

"You have accomplished a highly terrific great feat and my brave soldiers have
succumbed beneath your blows. Now, you are weary and in this condition, I shall not put you under
the clutches of Death."

"O, King of the Ranger of night! I know you have been tormented in the battle. Go
and return to Lanka. Having regained your breath, come back in your chariot with your bow and then
standing in your chariot, you will witness once more my prowess."

At these words, that King Ravana, his joy boasting subdued, his bow shattered, his
horses and chariot slain pierced with arrows, his great diadem broken, he soon returned to
Lanka.

While that mighty Ravana the Lord of Demons and the enemy of celestials and titans
returned to Lanka, Rama arranged for drawing out arrows from monkeys and from Lakshmana too, in the
forefront of that vast battle-field.

That Ravana, the adversary of the King of the Gods being vanquished, the celestials,
Asuras the multitude of beings in all the quarters, the creatures of the ocean with the great
serpents as also all beings on earth and in waters rejoiced very much.
undefined
undefined
undefined

Hearing the words of Angada, all those large-bodied monkeys who came back, having
arrived at a firm resolution, were waiting for the battle.

Restored to confidence by the words of the mighty Angada, those monkeys, whose
energy was well-augmented and prowess well-elevated, restored to a thrill of rapture and as they
were determined to die, marched forward to fight. Ready to abandon their lives, they were engaged
in a tumultuous battle.

Lifting up trees and very large mountain-rocks, the large-bodied monkeys thereupon
briskly ran towards Kumbhakarna.

The mighty and valiant Kumbhakarna, who got very much enraged, lifting a mace and
frightening his enemies, diffused them on all sides.

Seven hundred, eight hundred and thousands of monkeys struck by Kumbhakarna, lay
scattered on the ground.

That highly enraged Kumbhakarna, putting in his mount, (as many as) sixteen or eight
or ten or even twenty or thirty monkeys by his hands and devouring them like. Garuda the mythical
bird devouring the serpents in lots, ran about the battle-field.

Restored to confidence with difficulty, the monkeys assembling together from all
sides, stood in the battle-front, with trees and rocks in their hands.

Pulling out a mountain and looking like a hanging cloud, Dvivida the foremost among
the monkeys, ran towards Kumbhakarna, who resembled a mountain-peak.

Dvivida, springing up, hurled that mountain towards Kumbhakarna. Even without
reaching the colossal bodied Kumbhakarna, it however fell on his army.

That excellent mountain crushed the horses, elephants and the chariots. Another
mountain-top, when hurled, crushed the other demons.

Struck by the jerk of the mountain, that great battle-field of demons, with its
horses and charioteers killed, became dampened with blood.

The demons who fight from the chariots, with their terrific roar, at once discarded
the heads of the clamouring chiefs of monkeys, with their arrows, which were resembling the god of
death at the time of universal dissolution.

Uprooting large trees, the mighty monkeys too began to destroy the chariots, horses,
Camels and demons.

Staying in the sky, Hanuma showered mountain-tops, rocks and various types of trees
on Kumbhakarna's head.

The mighty Kumbhakarna broken those mountain-tops and shattered the torrent of trees
with his spike.

Then, taking the dreadful spike in his hand, Kumbhakarna ran towards that terrific
army of monkeys. Taking a mountain-peak in his hands, Hanuma stood in front of the approaching
Kumbhakarna.

The enraged Hanuma struck with violence Kumbhakarna, who was endowed with a
magnificent body and looking like the most elevated mountain. Thus attacked by Hanuma, Kumbhakarna
was stumbled with a sprinkling of blood and with his limbs succulent with flesh.

Holding firmly the spike, which was bright as lightning and looking like a blazing
mountain-peak, Kumbhakarna struck Hanuma on his chest, as Guha (the son of Shiva) struck Krauncha
mountain with his powerful javelin.

That Hanuma, struck in his broad chest by the spike in that great combat, was highly
perturbed and while vomiting blood from his mouth, awfully roared like the sound of thunderous
clouds at the time of dissolution of the world.

Looking at the perturbed Hanuma, all the troops of demons then suddenly shouted with
rejoice. The monkeys, on their part, felt restless and being oppressed with fear, ran away from the
battle-field.

Thereupon, cheering up the army and stopping them, the mighty Neela then hurled a
mountain-top on the intellectual Kumbhakarna.

Seeing that mountain-top befalling on him, Kumbhakarna then struck it with his fist.
By that strike of the fist, that mountain-top was burst into pieces and fallen down on the ground,
with sparks of fire and blaze.

The five excellent monkeys, viz. Rishabha, Sharabha, Neela, Gavaksha and
Gandhamadana marched ahead quickly towards Kumbhakarna.

Those five mighty monkeys struck the large-bodied Kumbhakarna from all sides, with
crags, trees, palms of their hands, feet and fists in battle.

Perceiving those blows merely as the senses of touch, Kumbhakarna was not at all
perturbed. He enfolded the greatly agitated Rishabha in his arms.

Squeezed by Kumbhakarna's arms, the awful Rishabha, the foremost among the monkeys,
fell down with blood coming out of his mouth.

Then, in battle, the enraged Kumbhakarna, the enemy of Indra, beating Sharabha with
his fist and Neela with his knee, struck Gavaksha with a palm of his hand and struck Gandhamadana
violently with his feet.

Perturbed by the blows given by Kumbhakarna, those monkeys being moistened with
blood, were bewildered and fell down on the ground, like chopped off Kimsuka trees.

Seeing those mighty chief commanders of monkeys falling down on the ground,
thousands of monkeys ran towards Kumbhakarna.

All those champions of monkeys, looking like mountains, jumping up on Kumbhakarna
who was looking like a mountain, ascended him and bit him with their teeth.

Those mighty armed excellent monkeys encountered that Kumbhakarna with their nails,
teeth, fists and arms.

Covered by thousands of monkeys that foremost among demons looking like a mountain,
stood out in a crowd, as a hill overgrown with trees.

Seizing all the monkeys with his arms, that mighty Kumbhakarna devoured them like an
enraged Garuda the eagle devouring the serpents.

Hurled by Kumbhakarna in his mouth which was looking like a hole in the earth, the
monkeys again came out from his nostrils and ears.

Kumbhakarna, the best among the demons, looking like a mountain, was very much
enraged and mutilated the monkeys angrily, before devouring them.

Making the earth dampened with flesh and blood, that demon, like an excited fire at
the time of dissolution, strolled among that army of monkeys.

Wielding a spike in his hand in the battle-front, the mighty Kumbhakarna shone like
Indra the lord of celestials wielding a thunderbolt in his hand and like Yama the god of death
wielding a noose in his hand.

That Kumbhakarna scorched away that army of monkeys in the same way as the fire
scorches away the dried-up forests in summer.

Those monkeys, without a commander, having their troops killed and terrified with
fear they were being destroyed by Kumbhakarna, roared with rebellious voices.

While Kumbhakarna was destroying them in many ways, the agitated monkeys sought
refuge in Rama, with their distressed minds.

Seeing the monkeys defeated in that great battle, Angada the son of Indra, ran
rapidly towards Kumbhakarna.

Taking a large mountain-top, Angada, roaring repeatedly and frightening all the
demons following Kumbhakarna's heels, hurled the mountain-top on Kumbhakarna's head.

Struck on the head with that mountain, that Kumbhakarna, Indra's adversary, with a
great rage, was excited and then ran rapidly towards the wrathful Angada.

Frightening all the monkeys with his great roar, the mighty Kumbhakarna hurled his
spike at Angada with anger.

Knowing that the spike is going to fall on him, the mighty Angada, the chief of the
monkeys, who was skilled in war-fare, avoided it with his alacrity.

Jumping up Angada struck on Kumbhakarna's chest, with the palm of his hand. Thus
beaten with anger by him, Kumbhakarna resembling a mountain, became giddy.

Getting his consciousness, that mighty demon threw down Angada by tightening his
fist with a scorn. Angada fell down unconscious.

When that Angada the foremost among the monkeys fell down unconscious on the ground,
Kumbhakarna ran towards Sugreeva, taking that spike in his hand.

Then, seeing the mighty Kumbhakarna coming suddenly towards him, the valiant
Sugreeva, the king of the monkeys, sprang up all at once.

Uplifting and tightly holding a mountain-top, the mighty Sugreeva ran towards the
sturdy Kumbhakarna with speed.

Seeing that Sugreeva coming rapidly towards him, Kumbhakarna, with all his limbs
braced, stood facing the king of monkeys.

Seeing Kumbhakarna who stood devouring the monkeys and with his body smeared with
the blood of the monkeys, Sugreeva spoke as follows:

"You struck down eminent monkeys. You have done a very difficult act. You have
devoured the armies. You obtained a great fame."

"Leave that army of monkeys. What will you do with these common beings? O demon! You
bear up against the falling of this one mountain being hurled by me."

Hearing those words, endowed with strength and courage, spoken by Sugreeva,
Kumbhakarna, the foremost of demons, spoke the following words:

"O monkey! You are the grandson of Lord Brahma and even the son of Riksharaja
(sprung from the yawn of Brahma) endowed with firmness and valour. Why do you roar?"

Hearing the words of Kumbhakarna, Sugreeva, firmly holding the mountain, hurled it
quickly on him. He struck Kumbhakarna's chest by that mountain, which was as strong enough as
Indra's thunderbolt.

Soon after falling on his broad chest, that mountain was crushed to pieces. Then,
the monkeys were suddenly distressed. The troops of demons roared with rejoice.

Struck by the mountain-top, that Kumbhakarna was enraged and roared with his mouth
wide open with anger. Holding firmly the spike, which was emitting a flash of lightning, he hurled
it to kill Sugreeva, the king of monkeys and bears.

Hanuma, jumping up and holding with his arms that sharp spike, furnished with golden
wreaths, and propelled by Kumbhakarna's arms, wreaths, and smashed it rapidly.

Then, the rejoiced Hanuma, placing on his knee, that large spike made of iron
weighing twenty thousand Tulas, broke it.

Seeing Hanuma breaking the spike, that army of monkeys was rejoiced, roared several
times and came back quickly from all quarters.

Then, the frightened Kumbhakarna became down-cast. Those monkeys were rejoiced and
made a lion's roar. Seeing the fate of spike in such a broken condition, they adored Hanuma.

Seeing that spike broken in that way, that mighty Kumbhakarna was enraged. Uprooting
a crest from Malaya mountain standing in the vicinity of Lanka and approaching Sugreeva, he struck
him with it.

Struck by the mountain-top in battle, that Sugreeva fell unconscious on the ground.
Seeing him falling unconscious on the ground in battle, the demons wee exceedingly pleased and
cried out loudly.

Seizing hold of that Sugreeva having wonderful and terrific prowess in battle, that
Kumbhakarna took him away, as an impetuous wind takes away a cloud.

Lifting up Sugreeva appearing like a huge cloud in the battle-field and marching
forward, Kumbhakarna shone like Mount Meru, distinguished by its very high and formidable peak.

Then, being praised in the battle-field by the demons for having seized hold of
Sugreeva and hearing the sounds of the celestials who were wondering at the seizure of Sugreeva,
Kumbhakarna the valiant chief of demons, sallied forth.

While taking away that Sugreeva looking like Indra, Kumbhakarna the adversary of
Indra and having the prowess of Indra, thought, "If he is killed, all this army including Rama gets
destroyed."

Seeing the army of monkeys running away hither and thither and Sgureeva the monkey
even being taken away by Kumbhakarna, the intellectual Hanuma, the son of wind-god thought as
follows:

"While Sugreeva is being taken away in this way, what is to be done by me? I shall
certainly do that which is justifiable to be done by me. Growing to the size of a mountain, I shall
destroy this Kumbhakarna."

"Let all the monkeys be delighted while Sugreeva the king of monkeys is liberated
and the mighty Kumbhakarna, with his body crumbled by the blows of my fists, killed by me in
battle."

"Even otherwise, this Sugreeva can win the freedom himself despite he is taken away
by celestials including demons and serpent-demons."

"I think Sugreeva is not yet conscious of his self, as Kumbhakarna struck him with
the blow of a mountain in the battle."

"Regaining his consciousness within a moment in this great battle, this Sugreeva
will do what is good for himself and for his monkeys."

"If I liberate this great-souled Sugreeva, there will be a painful dislike for him
and a perpetual in fame."

'Therefore, I shall wait for a while, for the king to show his prowess. Meanwhile, I
shall cheer up the scattered army of monkeys."

Thinking in this way, Hanuma the son of wind-god, then again brought firmness to the
large army of monkeys.

Taking that Sugreeva who was throbbing, that kumbhakarna entered the City of Lanka,
where he was greatly revered with showers of foremost flowers by the citizens staying in celestial
cars, streets, houses and gate-ways of temples.

Sprinkled by those showers of pop-corn and fragrant waters and due to the coolness
of the royal roads, the mighty Sugreeva gradually regained his consciousness.

The great souled Sugreeva, who was interposed between Kumbhakarna's shoulders,
regaining his consciousness with great difficulty and observing the royal highway of the city,
repeatedly thought (as follows):

"Having been captivated in this way, what should I do now? I have to do a proper act
now which is desirable and beneficial to the monkeys."

Thus thinking, Sugreeva tore asunder Kumbhakarna's ears by his nails as also nose by
his teeth and ribs by his feet.

Torn asunder with teeth and nails by Sugreeva, that Kumbhakarna with his ears and
nose deprived and his limbs moistened with blood, was subdued with rage, threw Sugreeva down on the
floor and crushed him.

Crushed down on the floor by that terrific Kumbhakarna and struck by the demons,
Sugreeva moved with speed like a ball towards the sky and got united with Rama.

Bereft of his ears and nose, the mighty Kumbhakarna, pouring out blood, shone like a
mountain with its streaming cascades.

Kumbhakarna the demon and the brother of Ravana, having his large body bathed in
blood, frightful in appearance, vomiting blood with rage, and looking like a mound of black
antimony shone akin to a cloud with an evening-twilight. With his face directed towards the
battle-front, Kumbhakarna the terrific demon made up his mind to continue his combat.

After the departure of Sugreeva, Kumbhakarna the adversary of Indra, with a rage,
marched ahead quickly for the battle. Finding out that he is then without any weapon, the dreadful
Kumbhakarna got possession of a hammer-like weapon.

Starting from the city quickly, that mighty Kumbhakarna then devoured that huge army
of monkeys in battle, like the devour of people by the augmented fire at the time of dissolution of
the world.

Penetrating that huge army of monkeys, Kumbhakarna who was greedily desirous of
flesh and blood in hunger, due to his deep bewilderment in battle, ate away even the demons,
monkeys, devils and bears. He devoured the principal monkeys just as the death devours people at
the time of the end of the world.

The enraged Kumbhakarna, quickly taking with his single hand, the monkeys and
demons, in one's two's, three's or in many and hurled them into his mouth

Struck with mountain-peaks, by the monkeys, the mighty Kumbhakarna, then, gushing
forth his flesh and blood, devoured the monkeys.

Thereupon, those monkeys, who were being devoured, sought Rama as their refuge. The
very much enraged Kumbhakarna, while eating away the monkeys, marched forward.

Grasping a hundred, a seven, an eight, a twenty and a thirty with his arms,
Kumbhakarna was devouring the monkeys and running about in the battle-field.

Having his entire body besmeared with flesh, marrow and blood together with wreaths
of tangled viscera hung over his ears, the demon with his very sharp teeth, rained spikes on the
monkeys, like Yama, the god of death, risen to power at the end of the world-cycle.

Immediately, Lakshmana the son of Sumitra, the annihilator of the foe's army and
conqueror of the cities of adversaries, commenced the battle with a rage.

The valiant Lakshmana pierced seven arrows into the body of Kumbhakarna. He took
some more arrows and released them too.

Tormented by that weapon of Lakshmana, that demon destroyed it completely.
Thereupon, the aggressive Lakshmana was enraged.

Then, Lakshmana covered the shining and charming golden armour of Kumbhakarna with
his arrows, even as the wind would make an evening-twilight cloud completely disappear.

Kumbhakarna, looking like a mound of collyrium, tormented by the arrows, decked with
gold, shone like the radiant sun with its rays screened by clouds.

Then, that terrific demon, with a thunderous noise of multiple clouds, spoke the
following words disrespectfully to Lakshmana.

"You declared your heroism fearlessly in battle, by attacking me, who has conquered
even the lord of death effortlessly in a combat."

"Anyone who even stands before me, the god of death, holding forth a weapon in a
great battle here, is venerable. What to tell about a person who bestows battle on me?"

"Even the powerful Indra, the lord of celestials, who mounted Airavata the elephant
and accompanied by all celestials, did not ever stand before me in battle."

"O Lakshmana! Today, I am gratified by your strength and abilities. Taking leave of
you, I desire to march forward towards Rama."

"Because I have been gratified by you by way of your ability, strength and firmness
in battle, I for my part desire to kill Rama alone, for when he is killed, all the army will be
killed."

"When Rama is killed by me battle here, I will make my army to fight with others who
remain on the battle filled and destroy them."

To that demon in battle, who has given his opinion thus, abounding in enology,
Lakshmana as though bursting with laughter, spoke the following extremely terrific words:

"O brave demon! You are telling that while you show your prowess, the heroes like
Indra and others feel unbearable; it is true. Just now, I have seen your prowess. But, see Rama the
son of Dasaratha, standing here unmoving like a mountain."

Hearing in this manner, that mighty Kumbhakarna the demon, brushing aside Lakshmana
and crossing him, ran, as though he is causing an earth-quake, towards Rama.

Thereupon, Rama, the son of Dasaratha, employing a spell (used to charm arrows)
called Raudra, discharged sharp arrows into Kumbhakarna's chest.

Flames of fire mixed with particles of charcoal came forth from the face of
Kumbhakarna, who was thus struck and who was running quickly towards Rama.

That foremost among demons, struck by Rama's arrow, roaring terribly with rage,
making the monkeys to run away in battle, ran himself towards Rama.

Those arrows, adorned with peacock's plumes, penetrated into his chest. His mace
dropped off from his hand and fell on the ground.

All his weapons fell scattered on the ground. Considering himself as weaponless,
that mighty Kumbhakarna then fought fiercely with his fists and arms.

That Kumbhakarna, with his body struck fiercely by arrows and bathed in blood,
poured forth blood, even as a mountain would pour forth a cascade.

With a terrific wrath, he felt insensible with blood. He roamed about, devouring the
monkeys, demons and bears.

Then, that Kumbhakarna, comparable to Yama the god of death, of terrific prowess and
strength, firmly holding a fearful mountain-peak, hurled it towards Rama.

Wile that mountain peak was still on its way and had not yet reached him Rama,
fixing together his well-known bow and arrows, split the mountain in the middle, with seven
straight-going arrows.

Then, Rama, the virtuous man and the elder brother of Bharata, split the large
mountain-peak which was hurled by Kumbhakarna at that time, with his variegated arrows made of
gold.

That mountain-peak, in the form of a peak of Mount Meru, as if shining with
splendour, while falling, caused two hundred monkeys to fall.

At that time, considering various strategies appropriate for killing Kumbhakarna,
the righteous Lakshmana spoke to Rama as follows:

"O king! He is not able to recognize who the monkeys are and who the demons are.
Intoxicated with the smell of blood, he is devouring his own persons and also others."

"Let the foremost of monkeys ascend well upon his body from all sides. Following the
commanders of their troops, let the monkey-leaders stand, surrounding him."

"If we do in that way, that evil-minded demon would be harassed by the huge weight,
making him to crawl on the floor and cannot kill the other monkeys."

Hearing those words of that intelligent Lakshmana, those monkeys were rejoiced and
mounted on the body of Kumbhakarna.

Kumbhakarna, when climbed upon by the monkeys, was enraged and shook them off with
violence, as a vicious elephant would shake off its mahout.

Seeing the monkeys shaken down, Rama on his part understanding that he was enraged,
jumped up speedily towards the demon and took an excellent bow.

The heroic Rama, enraged with red-hot eyes, as though he was scorching the enemy
with his looks, walked with speed, causing delight to all the leaders of the monkey-troops, who
were tormented with the fear of Kumbhakarna and quickly marched towards the demon.

Taking in his hand, a terrific bow with a firmly fastened cord looking like a snake
and looking variegated with its crust of gold, with a quiver full of excellent arrows fastened on
his back and fully restoring the monkeys to confidence, that Rama quickly marched forward.

That mighty and heroic Rama, who was highly unconquerable, accompanied by Lakshmana,
duly marched forward, surrounded by those troops of monkeys.

The mighty Rama saw the powerful Kumbhakarna, the annihilator of enemies, wearing a
crown and his eyes blood-red with anger.

Rama saw the angry Kumbhakarna, chasing all, like the mythical elephant guarding one
of the quarters, searching for the monkeys, enraged as he was and surrounded by the demons.

Rama saw that Kumbhakarna, looking like Vindhya and Mandara mountains, adorned with
armlets of gold, emitting blood from his mouth and appearing as a rising rainy cloud.

Rama saw that Kumbhakarna, who was licking the corners of his mouth which were
bathed in blood, all they way trampling the monkeys and resembling Yama in the form of
all-destroying time.

Seeing that Kumbhakarna, the foremost of demons, having a splendour of blazing fire,
Rama, the excellent of men, then stretched his bow.

Enraged by the twang of Rama's bow, Kumbhakarna, the foremost of demons, not
tolerating that sound, ran towards Rama.

Thereupon, Rama spoke to the dashing Kumbhakarna looking like a cloud driven by the
wind, whose arms were like the coils of Vasuki (the king of serpents) and appearing like a mountain
in the battle-field (as follows):

"O leader of the demons! Come on. Do not regret. I sand, wielding a bow in my hand.
Know me to be the annihilator of the race of demons. You will be dead within a moment."

Coming to know that he was Rama, Kumbhakarna laughed in a rebellious tone and ran up
enraged towards the monkeys, driving them away in the battle-field.

That Kumbhakarna of great splendour, as though bursting the hearts of all the
monkeys, laughed unnaturally as also awfully and spoke the following words to Rama:

'I am neither to be considered as Viradha nor Kabandha nor Khara nor Vali nor
Maricha. It is Kumbhakarna who arrived here."

"See my large terrific hammer, completely made of iron. By it, the celestials and
the demons were conquered by me before."

"You need not treat me with contempt, as I am deprived of my ear and nose. To me,
there is no agony even indeed a little, for having lost the ear and the nose."

"O faultless excellent Rama born in Ikshavaku dynasty! Show your prowess on my
limbs. After seeing your strength and prowess, I will be devouring you."

Hearing the words of Kumbhakarna, that Rama released plumed arrows. Even after
struck by them, whose speed was equal to a thunderbolt, that demon was neither shaken nor
afflicted.

Those arrows, which chopped off the Sala trees and killed Vali the foremost of
monkeys, could not torment Kumbhakarna's body which was like a thunderbolt.

Sucking those arrows with his body, as mountains suck up torments of water, that
Kumbhakarna, flourishing his hammer with terrible speed, hindered the tremendous speed of Rama's
arrows.

Then, flourishing that hammer which was smeared with blood and which can frighten
the great army of celestials, in terrific speed, that demon scared away the army of monkeys.

Thereupon, taking a great missile called Vayavya, Rama hurled it on the demon. By
that weapon, he chopped off Kumbhakarna's arm along with the hammer. With his arm chopped off,
Kumbhakarna roared tumultuously.

That Kumbhakarna's arm, identical to a mountain-peak, which was chopped off by
Rama's arrow, fell along with the hammer on that army of Sugreeva and killed that regiment of
monkeys.

Those monkeys who had escaped being broken and slain by that arm, though dejected
with their tormented limbs and taking recourse to the sides, witnessed a highly terrific encounter
between Rama and Kumbhakarna.

Having an arm chopped off by the arrow like a mountain-peak chopped off by a
gigantic sword, that Kumbhakarna with his another arm, pulled up a tree by its roots and then ran
towards Rama the lord of men in that battle-front.

By his arrow, which was made variegated by gold and furnished with a mystic spell of
Indra used for charming it, Rama chopped off Kumbhakarna's remaining arm, appearing like the coil
of a serpent along with his uprooted palm-tree.

That Kumbhakarna's arm, which appeared like a hill, was chopped off and fell down on
the ground. Wallowing hither and thither, it dashed with trees, rocks, monkeys and demons.

Seeing Kumbhakarna with his arms chopped off, abruptly with a roar, coming upon him
and taking two sharp arrows with a shape of a half-moon each, Rama chopped off the feet of the
demon in that battle.

Creating a resound everywhere in all directions, even in hill-caves, in the great
ocean, in Lanka as also in the armies of monkeys and demons, Kumbhakarna's feet fell down.

Widely opening his mouth like the mouth of a submarine fire and roaring, Kumbhakarna
whose arms and feet were cut off, ran (with thighs) quickly towards Rama, like Rahu the
seizer-demon going to seize the moon in the sky.

Rama filled up Kumbhakarna's mouth with sharply pointed arrows, having shafts
covered with gold. With his mouth full of arrows, Kumbhakarna was unable to speak. He moaned with
difficulty and even became unconscious.

Thereupon, that Rama got hold of an arrow spelled with a missile presided over by
Indra the lord of celestials, effulgent as sun's rays, resembling the rod of Brahma the lord of
creation as also the destructive Kala, the Time-Spirit, and having its speed equal to the wind.

Rama discharged against the demon, that arrow, whose shaft was inlaid with diamonds
and gold, which was shining as the dazzling sun and fire set ablaze, and which vied with the speed
of Indra's thunderbolt.

That arrow, propelled by Rama's arm, with a terrific aspect like the smokeless fire,
having a formidable energy of Indra's thunderbolt and illuminating the ten quarters with its own
splendour, proceeded forward.

That Rama slashed Kumbhakarna's head, which was looking like a huge mountain-peak,
having well-rounded tusks and with charming and quivering ear-rings, as like Indra the destroyer of
strong-holds, in the past, chopped off the head of Vritra, the demon of darkness and drought.

The large Kumbhakarna's head, adorned with ear-rings, shone like the moon being in
the middle, when the constellation, Punarvasu (presided over by Aditi the mother of gods and
consisting of twin-stars) has risen at the night.

That demon's head, equal in size to a mountain, struck by Rama's arrow, fell down.
It broke the buildings on the king's high-way and their gates as also threw down that high
rampart.

Then, that colossal demon of a great splendour fell into the sea. It crushed the
principal alligators, beautiful fishes as also snakes and entered the bowels of the earth.

While that mighty Kumbhakarna, the enemy of brahmanas and celestials was killed in
battle, the earth and mountains shook. Even the celestials raised a tumultuous roar with joy.

Then, saints of the celestial class, great sages*, serpents, gods, genii, Suparnas
(a class of bird-like beings of a semi-divine character), Guhyakas (another class of demi-gods),
including troops of Yakshas and Gandharvas (celestial musicians) standing in the sky, were rejoiced
at Rama's prowess.

Thereupon, at the mere sight of Rama, Ravana's relatives were perturbed at the
killing of Ravana of great intelligence and loudly roared, as elephants roar at the sight of a
lion.

Having destroyed Kumbhakarna in battle, that Rama shone in the midst of the army of
monkeys, in the same way as the sun shines in the midst of the celestial world, having destroyed
darkness, duly getting delivered from the mouth of Rahu.

Several monkeys were highly rejoiced, with their faces flowing like full-blown
lotuses. They adored Rama, who was dangerous to be attacked and as a beloved young man, killed an
enemy possessing a terrible strength.

By killing Kumbhakarna, who tormented the army of celestials and who was not
defeated at any time in great battles, Rama was rejoiced in the same way as Indra the lord of
celestials was rejoiced in killing Vritra, the great demon.
undefined
undefined
undefined
