
That Hanuma the courageous one, the son of Lord Vayu, saw the great aerial plane
standing in the middle of that building with a surprising hue, due to diamonds, and gems decorated
by series of refined gold.


That plane shone like symbol for solar path standing in the aerial path obtaining
the sky. Manufactured by Vishvakarma himself and praised by him as one without comparison in
beauty.


In that plane there is not even a small thing that is not made with great effort, in
that there is nothing without the best diamonds, those characteristics definitely are not in Devas
also, in that there is nothing that is not of great significance.


One that has been obtained by austerities and by prowess, one that moves about by
thoughts of concentrated mind, made from various significant parts with an appearance of parts of
equal significance, collected from here and there from all over the world.


Obtaining a special construction as a special object, like a mountain with wonderful
peaks adorned by many peaks, attractive to soul, calm like an autumnal moon, like the peak of a
mountain with other wonderful small peaks.


Hanuma saw that aerial plane which rakshasas who were great eaters, with a face
beautified by earnings, who roamed around in the sky and thousands of genii with round eyes,
crooked eyes and wide eyes capable of great speed carrying it.


That Hanuma the best among Vanara warriors saw there a best plane with the name of
Pushpaka with a more beautiful appearance than a group of flowers during spring, a more attractive
appearance than even the spring season.


Thus, this is the 8th chapter in Sundara Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana, the First Epic
poem of India.

undefined

undefined

undefined

To her who was in such circumstances, who was in distress, who was irraproachable, devoid of joy 
and dejected but virtuous, was bestowed with auspicious omens, as a prosperous man is bestowed with dependent 
servants.

The beautifully haired Seetha's left eye, which was auspicious, whose surrounding row of eye-lashes 
were curved, which was black, wide and bright-looking; was predominantly quivering, like a red lotus quivered 
by the blow of a fish.

Her left shoulder, which was pretty, distinguished beefy and round, which deserved to be applied 
with excellent black aloe and sandalwood paste, which had been used

Of her two thighs kept together, the left tigh which was beefy and well born, which resembled the 
trunk of a princely elephant was predominantly quivering, spoke indistinctly of existenc of Rama in front.

Again, the clothing of Seetha standing there, of spotless eyes and charming limbs, having teeth 
resembling the buds of jasmine, which was of golden shade and was slightly soiled as it were with dust, glited 
down, which appeared auspicious (for her).

Bolstered by these and some other omens which straight explained that they were fruitful on the 
earlier occasion also, Seetha of beautiful eyebrows disclosed a great joy, even as a seed vanished and withered 
by the wind and the sun, got sprouted by rain.

Moreover, having the lips resembling Bimba fruit, having beautiful eyes and eyebrows, whose eye 
lids are curved, having charming white teeth, her face shone like the moon liberated from the mouth of the demon 
Rahu.

Free from sorrow, her weariness removed, her mental affliction alleviated and her consciousness 
awakened with exaltation, that esteemed lady (Seetha) looked handsome with her countenance, as a night with the 
moon appears during the bright fortnight.

undefined

undefined

undefined

That Hanuma, best among monkeys, the intellectual son of Vayu, one with great might, stood on the 
moutain called Lamba with its high peaks equalling a high cloud, gathered courage and entered at night the city 
of Lanka ruled by Ravana and filled with beautiful forests and places of water such as lakes.

The city of Lanka was shone by buildings equalling autumnal clouds. With a sound resembling that 
of an ocean, it was served by ocean breeze. It was filled with well fed and mighty armies like Vitapati, the capital 
of Kubera. It had elephants positioned at archways and had white gates and archways.

Quickly approaching that city of Lanka which was protected by Rakshasas, like the the auspicious 
city of Bhogavati being protected by serpents moving about, spread with cloud illumined by flashes of lightening, 
served by pathways of stars, witha light breeze like the Indra's city of Amaravati, surrounded by a wall with 
a golden hue, decorated by flags with sounds from groups of small bells. He became happy and leapt up the wall.

Seeing the city everywhere Hanuma became surprised at heart. Thereafter Hanuma the monkey, became 
happy seeing the doors which were of golden color, with platforms of cat's eye gems, inlaid with diamonds, crystals 
and pearls, embellished with floors of gems, graced with elephants made of refined gold, crowned with spotless 
white silver, stairs studded with cat's eye gems, with inside walls made of crystal free from dust, provided with 
lovely assembly halls, with sounds of Krauncha birds and peacocks, served by royal swans, looking as though flying 
toward the sky, with auspicious houses resounding everywhere with the sounds of clarionets and ornaments, equalling 
the city of Vasvaukasaara, as though flying towards the sky.

Seeing that city of Ravana, which was best among cities, a wealthy city, a beautiful and auspicious 
city, that powerful Hanuma thought thus.

"It is not possible for anyone else to oppose this city, by strength alone, which is being guarded 
by armies of Ravana with raised weapons."

This land may be conquerable by Kumuda or Angada, to the great monkey Sushena or to Mainda or Dvivida.

There may be access to this land to the son of Sun God Sugreeva, to the monkey Kusaparvana, to 
the chief among monkeys Riksha and to me.

Considering the long armed Sri Rama's strength and Lakshmana's valour, Hanuma became happy.

That great monkey saw that city of king of rakshasas like a wealthy woman decorated with diamonds 
for her clothes, with various storage houses as earrings, with amouries for her breasts. Due to the lamps that 
illuminated the radiant great houses, all darkness was lost.

Thereafter, the guardian of that city, in her own form, saw Hanuma, the best among monkeys and 
the mighty one, entering.

Seeing that best among monkeys Hanuma there, that Lanka ruled by Ravana, rose up herself with a 
horrific appearance of face an eyes.

She stood in front of the best among Vanaras Hanuma. She made a great sound and spoke to Hanuma 
thus.

"O one who lives in gardens! Who are you? For what reason did you come here? As long as your lives 
are sustained, tell me the truth here before that."

"O Vanara! It is indeed not possible for you to enter this city of Lanka which is protected by 
Ravana's forces and strongly guarded all around."

Therafter the mighty Hanuma spoke to Lanka standing in front of Him as follows : "Whatever matter 
you are asking me, I will tell you that truthfully."

"You are standing at the entrance to the city. O one with ugly eyes! Who are you? O horrible one! 
Stopping me, for what reason are you threatening me?"

Listening to Hanuma's words, that Lanka, with ability to achieve desired form, became angry and 
spoke these strong words to Hanuma.

"I protect this city, being invincible. I wait for the orders of the king of demons Ravana, the 
great one."

"After humilliating me it is not possible for you to enter the city. Being beaten by me, you will 
leave life and have a permanent sleep."

"O Vanara! I am protecting this city of Lanka in all directions. This matter has been already told 
to you by me."

The son of Vayu and best among Vanaras heard Lanka's words and stood up like a second mountain, 
with a purpose.

Thereafter that Hanuma the wise one, with great strength, best among those who can fly and best 
among Vanaras, saw that city of Lanka in the form of an ugly woman and spoke thus.

"I should like to see the city of Lanka with its palaces, defensive walls and archways. I came 
here for that reason. I am very curious to see them."

"My arrival here is indeed to see Lanka's gardens, parks, forests and important houses all over."

Listening to Hanuma's words, Lanka with the ability to assume desired form, spoke harsh words stronger 
than before.

"O lowly Vanara with an evil mind! It is not possile for you to see this city ruled by king of 
rakshasas, without first defeating me."

Then that tiger among Vanaras Hanuma spoke to that demon : "O auspicious one! After seeing this 
city I will return back again to where I came from."

Thereafter that Lanka made a great sound causing terror and hit Hanuma, the best among Vanaras, 
with her palm quickly.

Then that tiger among Vanaras, the powerful son of Vayu, being hit powerfully by Lanka made a great 
sound.

Thereafter that Hanuma became dizzy with anger and folded his fingers of left hand. He then hit 
her with His fist. "She is a woman" - thinking thus He did not show much anger by Himself.

That demon fell on land immediately by that hit with a distressed body and appeared with a horrific 
face.

Thereafter the intellectual and glorious Hanuma saw her fallen down and thinking her to be woman, 
showed kindness.

Thereafter that Lanka being very gloomy spoke with a falterting tone without pride these words 
to Hanuma the Vanara.

"O long armed one! O best among Vanaras! Get propitiated and protect me. O gentle one! Those with 
great strength and courage always stand firm on tradition."

"O Vanara! I am myself the city of Lanka. O strong one! O courageous one! I am defeated by your 
strength."

"O lord of Vanaras! In earlier times I had been given a boon by Lord Brahma. Hear from me about 
this matter."

"Let this be known by you - whenever a Vanara conquers you with his might, then a fear will come 
for Rakshasas."

"O gentle one! With your appearance now, that time has come for me. Ordinance of Brahma is the 
truth and is immutable."

"The destruction has come for Ravana the evil minded king and to all Rakshasas due to Seetha."

"O best aming Vanaras! For that reason, enter the city of Lanka ruled by Ravana and do here whatever 
tasks you want to."

"O lord of Vanaras! Enter the auspicious city of Lanka stuck by the curse, ruled by the king of 
Rakshasas, roam everywhere and search for the chaste wife Seetha according to your comfort."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter that intellectual Hanuma saw the moon in the sky shining with rays,
obtaining the middle portion of sky. Spreading a great quantity of moon shine, moon looked like a
bull in heat among cows.


After that Hanuma saw the moon coming up destroying the sins of the world, causing
the great ocean to grow and causing all living beings to shine.


What ever splendour shines over Mount Mandara on earth, on the ocean during
evenings, over the lotuses in the waters, the same splendour shone on the beautiful moon.


Like a swan in a silver cage, like a lion in the cave of Mount Mandara, like a
warrior on a proud elephant, in the same way the moon shone in the sky.


The full moon with its horn like spot shone like a sharp horned standing ox with a
high hump, like a great white mountain with tall summits, like an elephant with golden tusks.


The Divine moon who lost the stain of cold water and frost, with lost stain due to
eclipse by the great planet sun, one who has a calm spot which is an abode of brilliant splendour,
with a symbol of hare, shone brilliantly.


In whatever way a lion obtaining a level surfaced rock (shines), in whatever way
best elephant obtaining a great battle(shines), in whatever way a king obtaining kingdom(shines),
in the same way the clear moon shone.


The Divine evening with lost stain due to rise of shining moon, with the stain due
to meal of flesh eating rakshasas, and in which the bitterness of mind of young women and their
lovers is wiped away, became with a heavenly glow.


Musical notes from stringed instruments which were comforting to ears started. Women
with good character were sleeping with husbands and also rakshasas with extremely strange character
started to roam.


That Hanuma the courageous one, the intellectual one, saw houses with people in
heat, houses filled with people, full chariots, horses, elephants and best furniture and also full
of wealth.


Hanuma saw rakshasas railing a lot at one another moving their heavy shoulders,
throwing wild and incoherent words a lot, insulting one another being intoxicated.


(Hanuma saw) rakshasas who smote breast, those who threw limbs on women, those who
were spreading their strange forms sporting their strong bows.


Hanuma saw some women applying sandal paste on their bodies and also some other
women sleeping there, in the same way some women with good appearance were smiling, and some other
women were sighing in anger.


Hanuma saw (the city of Lanka that) shone with great elephants making sound and also
with gentlemen well respected, shone with warriors in a wresting bout, with long sighs, like
serpents in a lake hissing.


Hanuma saw Yatudhanaas who were intellectuals, who were good talkers, who had good
devotion, important people to the world, who had various ways, and people who had beautiful names
in that city.


That Hanuma seeing people with good appearance, who had various good virtues, those
who were according to their character, those who were radiant, all those - became happy. Then that
Hanuma saw those who had horrific appearance, those who were according to their appearance - some
of those too.


Hanuma saw thereafter there, their women - those who were eligible for distinction,
those who were of great skill with an interested heart in lovers and in drinks and those who were
like stars with good effect.


Hanuma saw some women who were brilliant with radiance, adorned a lot with
bashfulness, those who were hugged by lovers in the middle of night, those who were hugged with
great pleasure, those who were hugged by flowers like birds.


The intellectual Hanuma saw some other women there comfortably sitting on the laps
of their lovers, at the top of their buildings, dear to their husbands and (some other women)
interested in virtuous deeds, and some possessed by the lord of love.


Hanuma saw women with golden complexion lacking clothes, women with a complexion of
refined gold suitable for mating and some other women also with the colour of moon and some other
women with beautiful bodies lacking a lover.


Thereafter that Vanara warrior saw those with great happiness, those who obtained
lovers who entertained, those who attracted like flowers, those with great beauty and women in
their houses filled with happiness.


Hanuma saw rows of faces shining like the moon, beautiful rows of eyes with curved
eyebrows and rows of ornaments like beautiful rows of lighting.


Hanuma did not see Seetha, one with great beauty born in a royal family following a
virtuous path, well brought up, like a creeper in full blossom, one who was thin, and one who was
born from the mind (of creator).


Hanuma did not see that Seetha who stood in the path of ancient righteousness with
Her sight on Sri Rama, who was possessed by the love for Sri Rama, who entered the glorious mind of
husband and always the best among women who were the best.


Hanuma did not see Seetha, tortured by separation from Sri Rama, with unabounding
tears in her throat, in earlier times who had invaluable and best jewellery on her neck, born with
beautiful eyebrows, with a sweet voice, like a she- hen who did not dance in a forest because of
Her current sorrow.


Hanuma did not see Seetha who was like a crescent with a blurred outline, like a
streek of gold coated by dust, like an arrow in an injury, like a series of clouds scattered by
wind.


Hanuma became a numb minded one for sometime, stricken with grief not seeing for a
moment Seetha, wife of Sri Rama the best among those who talk, and the lord of all humans.


Thus, this is the 5th chapter in Sundara Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana, the First Epic
poem of India.

undefined

undefined

undefined

As those ogre woman with a cruel nature were speaking a lot harshly and horribly, Seetha cried.

Thus being spoken to by ogre women, Seetha with a good mind being frightened a lot spoke as follows 
with a voice indistinct due to tears.

"A human woman is not suited to become a wife of an ogre. All of you eat me according to your desire. 
I will not do according to your words."

Being in the middle of ogre women, being frightened by Ravana also, like a daughter of gods, that 
Seetha did not get comfort being tormented by grief.

Like a fawn in a forest lost from its herd and tormented by wolves, Seetha was as though sinking 
into own body and shook a lot.

That Seetha with a broken heart due to grief, held a wide flowering branch of Ashoka tree and thought 
about Her husband.

Then that Seetha washing Her wide breasts with a flow of tears from eyes and thinking, did not 
get end of sorrow.

That Seetha was shaking like a plantain tree fallen down in an exceedingly windy place, trembling 
with fear of the ogre women, and became with a pale face.

That moving plait, which was wide and long, of that best woman was seen to be like a serpant in 
motion.

That Seetha tormented by grief, with a mind hit by sorrow, struck by calamity was sighing and let 
down tears and also cried.

Seetha being tormented by grief said : "Oh! Rama!" and again "Oh! Lakshmana!","Oh! Kausalya!, my 
mother-in-law" "Oh! Sumitra!"

"I thus being tormented by cruel ogre women here lacking Rama, being tormented by grief, when I 
am living even for a moment,' death at wrong time to woman or to a man is hard' - thus being said this popular 
saying in the world is true."

"This me with small merit,wreched, like an orphan, will perish like a ship in the middle of the 
ocean being hit by the speed of wind."

"Not seeing my husband that Rama and obtaining control of ogre women like a bank hit by water I 
am verily perishing with sorrow."

"Only fortunate see that my husband with eyes like petals of an expanded lotus, walking with the 
gait of a lion, correct in conduct and a pleasant talker."

"To me lacking that Rama with a famous soul, like after eating a pungent poison life in all ways 
is hard."

"By what this horrible and very dreadful grief is obtained by me, what kind of great sin had been 
done by me in another life."

"Together with great grief, I desire to give away my life. This desire is not obtainable by me. 
I am well protected by ogre women."

"Fie upon human condition! Fie upon being in the control of others. By what reason it is not possible 
according to own desire to give up life."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing the words of that high-souled Hanuma, Seetha who resembled the daughter of god, 
spoke the following words beneficial to herself.

"O Hanuma! Seeing you speaking pleasant words, I am as overjoyed, as a field with half-sprouted 
crop of grain is thrilled by receiving a rain."

"With my limbs emaciated with grief, I have a desire to touch that Rama the tiger among 
men. Show mercy on me and fulfill my desire."

"O Hanuma the excellent one among the troops of monkeys! Present the story of the blade 
of grass called Ishika hurled with anger and thereby one eye of the crow destroyed by Rama (as a signal 
remembrance)."

"O Rama! You ought surely to recollect that while a mark on my forehead had got effaced 
once, another mark with realgar was indeed painted by you on the side of my cheek."

"How are you, the valiant man equal to Indra the Lord of celestials and Varuna the King 
of Universe, ignore Seetha who was taken away and now staying in the midst of these demons?"

"O faultless Rama! This wonderful jewel for the head head has been protected well by 
me. Seeing this in my distress, I have been getting delighted, as though I have seen you."

"This splendid jewel, produced in water, has been sent to you. Absorbed in grief, I shall 
not be able to survive henceforth."

"With a hope of your coming here at any time, I am enduring these unbearable hardships 
and also the words of horrible female demons; which pierce my heart."

"O Rama the prince, the annihilator of enemies! I shall hold my life only for a month. 
I will not survive without you, after a month."

"This Ravana, the king of demons, is terrible. In my instance, his glance is not pleasant. 
Hearing that you are causing a delay, I will not survive even for a moment."

Hearing the words of Seetha, spoken pitiably with tears, Hanuma the son of wind-god, 
with a great splendour, spoke (as follows):

"O Seetha the princess! Rama has grown averse to everything else, caused by grief towards 
you. I sear it to you truly. when Rama is overpowered by grief, Lakshmana too gets tormented with grief." 
"O lady! Somehow or other, you have been discovered by me. This is not the time to lament. You will 
see the end of your sorrow shortly." "Those two princes, the excellent among men, the annihilator of 
enemies and who are eager to see you, will surely reduce Lanka to ashes. "O large-eyed Seetha! Killing 
the cruel Ravana along with his relatives, Rama and Lakshmana will take you to their own city."

"O faultless Seetha! Be pleased to give another token of remembrance, which Rama will 
recognise and which creates pleasure to him."

Seetha said, " An excellent token of remembrance was indeed given by me. Seeing this 
jewel for my hair, Rama will trust your words."

Taking that excellent jewel, the illustrious Hanuma, the best among monkeys, offered 
salutation to Seetha by bowing his head and has set off to go.

Seeing that Hanuma, the best among monkeys, possessed of energy to jump up with great 
speed and expanding, Seetha spoke (as follows) in her voice choked with tears and looking miserable 
in her face filled with tears.

"O Hanuma! Enquire about the welfare of Rama and Lakshmana, the brothers looking like 
lions, of Sugreeva together with his ministers and of all other."

"Be pleased to make that long-armed Rama deliver me from this ocean of sorrow."

"O valiant monkey! After approaching Rama, appraise him of this terrific gush of my grief 
and also about the threatening attitude of these female-demons. Have a happy journey!"

Having been appraised of the matter by Seetha the princess, having accomplished his object, 
having his mind filled with joy and having perceived that only a little remained to be done, Hanuma 
intellectually sought the northern direction.

undefined

undefined

undefined


That Hanuma, the strong one, saw a group of houses with windows in golden hue,
embedded with cat's-eye gems, like a great group of clouds in rainy season with lighting, together
with a group of birds.


Hanuma saw various halls of the houses, important buildings storing conches, bows,
and other weapons, and also heartening spacious attics at the top of mountain- like houses.


Hanuma saw houses glittered by various riches, well worshipped by Devas and Asuras,
devoid of all flaws and obtained by the self-might of rakshasas.


Hanuma saw those houses of the ruler of Lanka, constructed by great effort as though
constructed by Mayaa himself on earth with all best qualities.


Thereafter Hanuma saw the best house of the lord of rakshasas, having the appearance
of a cloud, soul-captivating one having a beautiful form made of gold which has no comparison,
suitable of Ravana's might


Hanuma saw Ravana's house like heaven thrown upon earth, effulgent with glory,
embedded with variety of diamonds covered by flowers of various trees, like the summit of a
mountain covered by pollen.


Being shone by the best among women like a cloud by lightening, being worshipped,
like being carried by the best swans, like an aerial car full of splendor, of good people in
sky.


Hanuma saw the best house like a beautiful cloud endowed with many hues, like the
sky illumined by planets including the moon, decked with numerous precious stones like a mountain
peak, looking picturesque with numerous minerals.


The earth was made to be full of mountain ranges. The mountains were made to be
abounded of trees. The trees were made to be full of flowers. The flower was made to be full of
filaments and petals.


White mansions were also built in the same way. Lakes also with beautiful flowers
and also lotuses together with filaments and forest that were the best and wonderful.


There the great Hanuma saw a great aerial car, the best among best of aerial cars,
shining with the name of Pushpaka with the rays of precious stones, and capable of traveling long
distances.


Artificial birds made of cat's-eye gems, as well as birds made of silver and coral,
wonderful serpants made of various jewels, horses of beautiful limbs suitable by their noble breed
were arranged.


Birds were made with corals on their wings and ogether with golden flowers, with
good wings, with curved and bent wings in a playful way, shining like helpers of the god of love
himself


Images of elephants in a lotus-pool with filaments of lotus on body, with lotus
petals held in their trunks, were devoted to the worship of an image of Goddess Lakshmi. And also
an image of Goddess Lakshmi with four graceful hands and holding lotus in Her hand was made to
exist in Pushpaka.


In this fashion, nearing that house which was shining like a mountain with a
beautiful glow that house with great sweet fragrance like a beautiful mountain during spring, with
beautiful cave became surprised and saw (again).


Thereafter that Hanuma nearing that city of Lanka worshipped by Rakshasas, ruled by
arms of ten-headed Ravana, moving thereabout became very gloomy on not seeing that Seetha well
worshipped by all and greatly conquered by the virtues of Her husband Sri Rama


Thereafter then the heart of the great souled Hanuma who contemplated supreme spirit
in many ways with a disciplined mind following righteous path, with good observant eyes, moving
about in the city of Lanka became greatly sorrowful on not seeing Seetha.


Thus, this is the 7th chapter in Sundara Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana, the First Epic
poem of India.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing the words of Hanuma, Rama the son of Dasaratha, having Lakshmana by his side, 
pressing that jewel on his bosom, began to weep.

Seeing that excellent jewel, Rama emaciated with grief, having his eyes filled with tears, 
spoke to Sugreeva as follows:

"Even as a cow, who is affectionate towards her offspring, gushes forth the milk (from 
her teats) due to her love at the very sight of her calf, so does my heart too melt through the sight 
of this excellent jewel."

"This excellent jewel was presented by my father-in-law to Seetha when she had become 
a bride and was tied to her head in such a way that it looked additionally beautifying."

"The jewel, which was found in the waters and recommended by the good, had been presented 
to him earlier by the intelligent Indra the lord of celestials, who was highly pleased in Yajna, a sacrificial 
rite (intended to propitiate him)."

"O gentle Sugreeva! Seeing now this excellent jewel, I am considering it as surely as 
obtaining the sight of my father as well as Janaka, the king of Videha."

"This jewel indeed looks splendid on the head of my beloved Seetha. By seeing this now, 
I am considering as though I obtained the sight of Seetha herself."

"O gentle one! Repeat again and again, what Seetha the daughter of Videha's king said 
to you, sprinkling me with your stream of words, like offering water to a thirsty person."

"O Lakshmana! What could be more painful than the fact that I am seeing this jewel found 
in waters, without the arrival of Seetha?"

"O gentle one! If Seetha can survive for a month, it means that she is surviving for 
long. O gentle one! Without that black-eyed Seetha, I cannot survive for even a moment."

"Take me too to that place where my beloved Seetha has been seen. I cannot halt even 
for a moment, after receiving the news of her location."

"How does Seetha, my virtuous wife with her charming limbs, who is very shy, stay all 
the time with demons who are terrific and cruel?"

"Her countenance, surely like automnal moon, though liberated of darkness, but screened 
by clouds, does not shine at present."

"O Hanuma! Tell me now, correctly what Seetha told you. I shall surely survive, by hearing 
her words, even as a sick man would with the help of a medicine."

"Tell me, what my beautiful consort, who is sweet-natured, and who utters sweet words, 
having fine hips and has been separated from me, said to you."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing those words of Hanuma, Angada the son of Vali spoke as follows: "Even after our 
seeing of Seetha, it is not proper for us to approach the high-souled Rama without taking Seetha with 
us."

"I perceive it as improper to inform there that Seetha the princess, though seen by you 
of renowned prowess, has not been brought here."

"O the best of monkeys! No one is equal to us even in our prowess nor indeed anyone who 
can leap like us in the worlds either of celestials or demons."

"Hanuma indeed thus killed all the warriors among the demons. What work is remaining 
to be done by us? We will go, after taking Janaki."

Jambavan, the foremost among the forest-animals, understanding the sense, was very much 
pleased and spoke the following meaningful words to that Angada, who thus formed a resolution.

"O prince! This thought you thus perceive is not incompetent of us. But, you must see 
the way in which Rama's inclination would be, for the accomplishment of the object."

undefined

undefined

undefined

"O excellent among men! Having shown respect for me out of her affection and good-heartedness 
for you, I, who was in a haste to go, was spoken to again by Seetha the princess about the further course 
of action."

"Rama, the son of Dasaratha, is to be informed by you thus in several ways, for quickly 
killing Ravana in battle and also as to how he can get me back."

" 'O hero the annihilator of enemies! If you deem it fit, stay for a day in a secret 
place. You can go tomorrow after taking rest'."

"'O the valiant one! Because of your presence, the termination of my full-blown grief 
may continue for a while'."

"'When you, the courageous one, have actually left to come back, there will be a danger 
even to my life. There is no doubt about this'."

"'The sorrow born of your disappearance will further torment me, who is overtaken by 
one sorrow after another, miserable and doomed to grief as I am'."

"'O best among the monkeys! O valiant one! In the matter of monkeys and bears who are 
your helpmates, this very grave doubt stands before me'."

"'How indeed can those troops of monkeys and bears or Rama and Lakshmana can cross that 
great insurmountable ocean?'"

"'Three beings viz. Garuda the eagle, or yourself or the wind-god only have the capacity 
of crossing this ocean'."

"'O valiant monkey! That is why, what strategy are you visualizing to fulfill this act, 
which is so difficult to accomplish thus? You are indeed excellent of those who know how to accomplish 
any work'."

"O Hanuma the annihilator of hostile enemies! You, as one alone, are capable of fulfilling 
this task. Your act of fulfilling this task your act of fulfilling the result is well-known."

""It would result in his glory, if Rama, after killing Ravana along with his entire army, 
takes me to his city in his victory'."

"'Rama ought not to take me back for fear that Ravana, in the same manner as Ravana the 
demon took me away from the forest in the absence of Rama by cheating that heroic Rama."

If Rama, the destroyer of rival army, fills the entire Lanka with arrows and takes me 
home, it will be quite worthy of him."

"For that reason, you act in such a way, that the high-souled Rama, valiant in battle, 
exhibits the prowess befitting of him."

"Hearing that appeal (of Seetha), that was somewhat good in its meaning, courteous and 
duly furnished with reasons, I gave then my remaining reply (as follows):

"'O Seetha the princess! Sugreeva, the lord of the troops of monkeys and bears, excellent 
among the monkeys and endowed with strength, is firmly determined to rescue you."

"So many monkeys, endowed with prowess, perseverance great strength and who can rush 
to any place as they wish, are intensely committed to Sugreeva's command. There is no hindrance to their 
movement either in the sky or the ground or in a horizontal region between the sky and the ground. Those 
monkeys with unlimited splendour are not indolent in performing any great task."

"Those illustrious monkeys, proud of their strength and following the path of wind, circumambulated 
the entire earth several times."

"'In them, some of the monkeys are superior to me and some are even equal to me. No one 
in the vicinity of Sugreeva is inferior to me. When I have arrived here, why to talk about those mighty 
ones? Generally, superior ones are not sent for errands. Only others are indeed sent'."

"'O Seetha the princess! Enough of your lamentation. Take away your sorrow. Those leaders 
of monkeys will reach Lanka by one single leap'."

"Rama and Lakshmana, those two lions among men, also of great strength, ascending on 
my shoulders, can come to you, like the rising sun and the moon."

"Rama, the annihilator of enemies, similar to a lion, and Lakshmana wielding a bow in 
his hand, will surely approach the entrance-gate of Lanka and you will see them soon."

"'You can see soon those valiant monkeys, with their claws and tusks as weapons, having 
the prowess of lions and tigers and looking like lordly elephants, coming here together'."

"'You will hear within a short time, the clamour of the excellent of monkeys resonating 
like a mountains and clouds, on the peaks of Mount Malaya in Lanka'."

"'You will see Rama, the annihilator of enemies, returning from exile, and getting anointed 
to the crown in Ayodhya, along with you soon'."

"Thereafter, soothened by me with comforting, well-disposed and agreeable words, Seetha, 
though tormented with thought of your grief, obtained peace of mind."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Seetha listening to that horrible ogre's word, being tormented spoke in reply with a pitiable voice, 
pitifully and slowly.

Being tormented by grief, in a pitiful state, with excellent limbs, devoted to husband, thinking 
about husband alone, with pleasant smiles Seetha was sobbing, shivering and placing a straw in between herself 
and Ravana spoke thus in reply.

"Turn your mind back from me. Let your mind be made on your own wives. Like best emancipation for 
a sinner, it is not appropriate to pray me."

"I was born in a great family. Getting such family, having one husband, a bad deed which is blameable 
is not to be made by me."

Seetha with renown thus speaking to that Ravana, turned back and spoke words again.

"I who am wife of another and devoted to husband am not suitable wife to you. Observe righteousness 
well. Follow well course of conduct of virtuous."

"O Ogre! How your wives are to be protected, in the same way others' wives are to be protected. 
Making yourself as an example enjoy your own wives."

"One who is not satisfied in own wives, a fickle-minded one with disturbed senses, mean minded 
one, to such a man, others' wives will lead to humilation."

"Here are there not good people? Or are you not following those who are good? It must be like that 
because your mind, devoid of traditions is perverse."

"You who is being led by mind towards unreal is not taking wholesome words being said by righteous 
onesfor the destruction of ogres."

"After getting a king who has uncontrolled mind, interested in a bad path, wealthy states and cities 
also will be destroyed. After getting you like that this Lanka filled with best things in a short while will be 
destroyed due to your one sin."

"O Ravana! When there is destruction of a short sighted one being hit by his own deeds, a sinner, 
living beings will be happy."

"About you who is a sinner thus being destroyed, people who have been humiliated by you being happy 
will speak thus: 'The cruel Ravana by God's grace has got this danger' ".

"I am not capable to be tempted by wealth or by money. I am not separate with Raghava like the 
sun-shine with the sun."

"After making as a pillow that worshipped shoulder of that lord of the world, of that Rama, how 
can I make as pillow some other one's shoulder?"

"Like the education of a brahmin with a famous mind, initiated in religious vow, I am suitable 
wife to that Rama alone the lord of earth."

"O Ravana! Let me meet together with Rama like a female elephant with a male elephant in a forest."

"It is suited that this Rama, best among men, is made to be a friend by you who is desiring continued 
existence and not desiring a horrible slaying."

"Rama the righteous one is indeed known as one who loves those who seek protection. If you desire 
to live. let there be friendship between you and Rama."

"You seek graciousness of this Rama who loves those who seek protection. Becoming piously disposed, 
you are suited to return me to this Rama."

"In this way giving me to Rama will become fortunate to you. O Ravana! If you do in a different 
way, you will get slayed."

"Drawn out Vajrayudha, the weapon of Indra may spare some one like you. Lord of death may spare 
you for a long time. That Rama the lord of worlds greatly enraged will not spare you."

"Like the great sound of Vajrayudha hurled by Indra, you will hear a loud sound which is sonorous 
of Rama's bow."

"Arrows with good nodes, with blazing tips, like snakes, with characteristic signs of Rama and 
Lakshmana will fall down soon here in Lanka."

"Arrows tied with the plumes of an eagle will hit ogres everywhere in this city and will cover 
the city without space."

"That Garuda called Rama speedily will pluck the great serpants called ogres like Vainateya plucking 
the serpants."

"My husband who is a destroyer of foes will take me away from you like Lord Vishnu with three steps 
taking away the brilliant prosperity from Asuras."

"O ogre! While the army of ogres was being killed at Janasthana which became the land of dead, 
this bad deed has been done by you being powerless."

"O lowest one! When those brothers were gone out, entering hermitage without them, I have been 
abducted by you."

"Like tiger by dog, smelling the scent of Rama and Lakshmana it is indeed not possible by you to 
stand in their view."

"To you like that, enmity with those two is like the enmity of one hand of Vruttasura with two 
hands of Indra and it is not persevering for you to be an opponent with them."

"My husband that Rama together with Lakshmana will take away with His arrows your life quickly 
like the sun drying up shallow water."

"Killed by time even if you go to the mountain of Kubera or to his house or if you go to the assembly 
of King Varuna, without doubt you will not be relased from Rama like a great tree from thunderbolt."

undefined

undefined

undefined

The best among vanaras praising that Seetha who is fit to be praised, and also praising Sri Rama 
pleasing with His virtues, became immersed in thought again.

That Hanuma the radiant one thinking for a moment, cried about Seetha and became with eyes tormented 
with tears.

"Respectable to Lakshmana, instructed by teachers, Seetha is also dear to teachers; if She is stricken 
with grief, destiny is indeed difficult to withstand."

"Knowing the effort of Sri Rama and of sagacious Lakshmana, Seetha is not worried a lot, like Ganga 
in the rainy season."

"Sri Rama is suited to Seetha with Her well matched character, age and conduct; with well matched 
pedigree and characteristics this black-eyed Seetha is also suited to Him."

Seeing that Seetha with the radiance of new gold, like the goddess Laksmi, delightful to the world, 
Hanuma went by heart to Sri Rama spoke these words also.

"For the sake of this Seetha, the wide eyed one, Vali of great strength has been killed, Kabanda 
also equalling Ravana in strength has been felled."

"In the forest during war Virada of horrible prowess has been killed by Rama by valour, like Sambara 
by Mahendra."

"At Janastaana fourteen thousands of rakshasas of terrible deed have been killed by arrows equalling 
tongues of fires."

"By Rama with a famed mind, Khara has been killed, Trisira also has been fell down, Duushana with 
great glory also has been killed in war."

"For Her sake Sugreeva obtained wealth of vanaras ruled by Vali difficult to be obtained and worshiped 
by the world."

"For the sake of Her, with wide eyes, the ocean, lord of rivers and streams, has been crossed by 
me; this city also has been explored."

"If Sri Rama for Her sake turns upside down the earth with the ocean at the end, and the entire 
universe it is fair, this is my opinion."

"Among three worlds, if it is a choice between kingdom or Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, all the 
kingdom of three worlds will not approach a sixteenth part of Seetha."

"This She is that Seetha, the daughter of king Janaka of Mithila, the great soul, and noble one 
with a firm resolution towards husband."

"While a field was being ploughed She rose up splitting the earth covered by auspicious dust of 
field equalling pollen."

"She is the famed eldest daughter-in-law of king Dasaratha the valorous one, not turning back in 
the battle."

"This She the dear wife of Rama the righteous one, grateful one, knower of Self has obtained capture 
of demonesses."

"Whoever Seetha abandoning all comforts, forced by the love towards husband not thinking about 
sorrows, entering forest unpopulated with humans, being happy with fruits and roots, devoted to the service of 
Her husband, even in forest is getting great happiness like in a palace, the one with golden limbs, always with 
a smiling talk, not suited to misfortunes - that this Seetha is bearing all this suffering."

"Sri Rama likes to see this Seetha who is endowed with excellent character and tormented by Ravana, 
like a thirsty one for a place where water is available freely."

"By Her gain again Sri Rama definitely will get happiness like a king who lost kingdom getting 
back the land."

"Left by coveted enjoyments, lacking relatives also Seetha is keeping body desirous of meeting 
with Sri Rama."

"She is not seeing demonesses, not flowers, fruits or trees and with a single heart is meditating 
only on Sri Rama - this is sure."

"Husband is indeed the greatest adornment for a woman greater than jewellery; this Seetha though 
deserving of decoration, is not looking charming without Sri Rama."

"Sri Rama although bereft of Her that Lord Rama is doing an impossible task by retaining His body 
and not being depressed by sorrow."

"Knowing Her with black ended hairs, with lotus like eyes, deserving of comforts, and in sorrow, 
my mind also is gloomy."

"Whoever Seetha with earth-like patience, with eyes resembling lotuses, was protected by Sri Rama 
and Lakshmana, that Seetha now is being guarded by ogresses with crooked eyes at the base of a tree."

"With lost glory like a lotus plant hit by snow, being tormented by a series of calamities, Seetha 
obtained a pitiable condition like a chakravaka bird without a companion."

"Ashoka trees with bent branches due to flowers are giving rise to gloom a lot to Her; Due to melting 
of snow the risen up moon also with thousands of rays is causing grief."

The mighty one, the best among vanaras, quick one, Hanuma thus observed the subject: "This is Seetha!" 
- thus with a firm mind sat at that tree, leaning against it.

undefined

undefined

undefined

That Ravana, the long-armed, who caused people to cry, looking up at that monkey standing 
in front of him, was affected with violent anger, having his mind seized with suspicion, speculated 
(as follows) about Hanuma, the jewel among the monkeys, who was invested with splendour.

"When Mount Kailasa was moved by me, is it the same Nandi the divine bull (attendant 
of Siva) which cursed me long ago and came here now in this form or whether he is Bana the great demon 
(son of Bali) came here in the form of a monkey."

That king Ravana, becoming enraged with red hot eyes, spoke the following concise and 
meaningful words relevant to that occasion, to Prahasta, his chief of ministers.

"Ask this wicked monkey from where did he come, for what reason did he come to this place 
and for what purpose did he frighten the female-demons in destroying our garden."

"Ask this evil-minded monkey as to what really is his purpose in coming over to my invincible 
City and what pursuit he is doing this battle."

Hearing the words of Ravana, Prahasta spoke the following words to Hanuma, "Take courage! 
Happiness to you! You need not get frightened, O monkey!"

"O monkey! If Indra has sent you to the abode of Ravana, tell me the truth. Do not have 
fear. You will be released."

"Are you, the one who has entered our city, assuming the guise of a spy, sent by Kubera 
the god of riches or by Yama the god of death or by Varuna the lord of the sea or whether sent by Vishnu 
the lord of preservation, as a messenger, longing for a victory?"

"O monkey! Your form alone is that of a monkey. Your splendour indeed is not that of 
a monkey. Now, tell me the truth. Thereupon, you will be released."

"If you tell a lie, your survival will be difficult. Or else, tell me the purpose of 
your entry into Ravana's abode."

Hearing the words of Prahasta, Hanuma spoke to Ravana the Lord of demons as follows, 
"I am not a messenger of Indra or Yama or Varuna. I have no friendship with Kubera the god of riches, 
nor am I instigated by Vishnu. This is just my form of existence, by my very birth. I am a monkey who 
came here."

"The sight of Ravana the King of demons is difficult to be obtained. Intent on that object 
(of sight of Ravana), the garden was destroyed by me."

"Then, those strong demons came with a desire to fight with me. Just for protecting my 
body, I had to attack them in battle."

"I am incapable of being bound by missiles and nooses even by celestials and demons. 
This boon came to me also from Brahama only."

With a desire to see you the king, I surrendered to the missile. Soon after bound by 
the demons, I was indeed released from the missile. I came to your presence, prompted by some mission 
of Rama."

"O, Lord of demons! Know me to be a messenger of Rama who is possessing I am unlimited 
splendour. I am telling you a beneficial word. Listen to it."

undefined

undefined

undefined

That Hanuma, with coral-coloured face, very bright, the son of wind-god, wearing a humble and feeble 
look, approached Seetha by stepping down from the tree and offered her his salutation by keeping his joined palms 
on his head and spoke the following sweet words:

"O Lady with your eyes resembling lotus leaves, wearing a worn out silken cloth! O, the irreproachable 
one! You have stood, holding by the hand a branch of the tree who are you?"

"Tears of sorrow are gushing down from your eyes, as water is scattered down from two lotus-petals. 
Why?"

"O auspicious lady! In whom are you born-whether in celestials or in ogres or in serpent-demons 
or in celestial musicians or in demons or in semi-divine beings or in mythical beings?"

"O lovely-faced woman! Who are you among eleven Rudras who bestow strength, or among Maruts the 
storm-gods or among eight Vasus the beneficent gods? O Handsome lady with fine hips! You appear to me as a deity."

"Are you Rohini, endowed with all the best qualities, fallen from heaven, left behind by moon and 
excellent among stars."

"O dark-eyed lady! Are you not the auspicious Arundhati, who irritated her husband, Vasishta the 
sage either by anger or by error?"

"O the slender waisted lady! You seem to be lamenting over someone who died is he your son, or 
father or brother or husband."

"You are lamenting. You are sighing a lot. You are touching the earth. You have royal insignia 
in you. According to these things, I do not consider you as a divine woman."

"Based on the marks on your person and your bodily characteristics, I believe you to be a queen 
of an emperor and the daughter of a king."

"If you are Seetha stolen per force by Ravana from Janasthana, tell it to me who is asking if you 
please!"

"According to your miserable state, the super-human beautiful figure and your costume endowed with 
austerity, surely you are Rama's wife."

Hearing his words, Seetha was delighted of Rama's mention and spoke the following words to Hanuma, 
who was dwelling on a tree.

"I am the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, eminent among the excellent kings on earth, who understands 
the nature of the spirit and who torments the army of the adversary."

"I am the daughter of the noble-natured Janaka, the king of Videha kingdom. I am know.

"I stayed in Rama's house there for twelve years, enjoying the worldly pleasures belonging to human 
kind and fulfilling all my desires."

"Thereafter, in the thirteenth year, King Dasaratha along with his preceptors started to perform 
anointment of the kingdom to Rama, a celebrity of Ikshvaku dynasty."

"While that anointment of Rama was being arranged, a queen called Kaikeyi spoke the following words 
to Dasaratha, her husband.

"If Rama gets anointed for the kingdom, from now onwards, I shall neither drink water nor take 
my food daily. This is the end to my life."

"O the excellent king! If that word of pledge was uttered affectionately by you and if it is not 
going to be a waste, let Rama go to the forest."

"Hearing the cruel and the disagreeable words of Kaikeyi and recollecting the boon given to the 
queen, King Dasaratha who was true to his word, fell unconscious.

"Then, the aged king, who was firmly established in truth and righteousness, regretfully asked 
his illustrious eldest son to give back the kingdom, which he bestowed him earlier."

"That glorious Rama first admitted his father's words in mind, considering them more dearer than 
his anointment to the kingdom and accepted them with his word."

"The truly courageous Rama always gives anything to others and does not take anything from others. 
He does not speak just a little of a disagreeable word even for the cause of his life."

"Leaving behind his greatly valuable outer garments and wearing garments made of bark, that highly 
illustrious Rama gave up his kingdom willingly and assigned me to his mother."

"To me bereft of him, residing even in heaven does not indeed give pleasure. I, as such, decided 
to proceed to the forest and soon was ready to start even ahead of Rama."

"Adorned with clothes of bark, the illustrious Lakshmana, the rejoice of his friends, got ready 
to follow his elder brother even before (me)."

"Obeying respectfully the command of Lord Dasaratha, we as such with a firm resolution, entered 
the forest, which we have never seen before and which was deep and profound in appearance."

While Rama of great vigour was dwelling in the forest of Dandaka, the evil-minded demon, Ravana 
took me, Rama's wife, away."

"A period of two months of survival-benefit has been given to me by him. For that reason, after 
the said two months, I shall give up my life."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thereafter the moon with a peaceful rise, with radiance equaling that of a group of lotuses, obtained 
the clear sky like a swan obtaining blue water.

That moon with a peaceful glow served Hanuma with cool rays as though performing help with radiance.

Thereafter Hanuma saw Seetha with a face like a full moon, put down by the weight of grief, like 
a ship sinking down in water due to weight.

Hanuma wanting to see Seetha saw nearby ogresses with horrible appearance - one with one eye; one 
with a single ear and also one with ears as covering; one with conch shell like ears; one with fattened nose up 
to head; one with lean and long neck; one with disheveled hair and also one without hair; one with blanket like 
hair; one with hanging stomach and breasts; one with hanging face; one with lips at chin; one with hanging face; 
one with hanging knees; one who is short; one who is tall and also hunch backed one; one who is distorted; a dwarf 
one and also one with high teeth and one with crooked mouth, one with green eyes and one with a horrible face.

Hanuma saw horrible ogresses, dark complexioned ones, angry ones, those who like quarrels, ones 
wearing big darts, mallets and clubs of iron, with faces like those of pigs, deer, tigers, buffaloes, goats, she-foxes, 
with feet like those of elephants, camels, horses, with heads sunk into bodies, with single hand and single foot, 
those ears like that of donkeys and horses, those with cow ears, those with elephant ears, those with monkey ears, 
and some others without nose, those with horizontal nose, those with crooked nose, those with elephant-like nose, 
toes with nose fixed in forehead, with feet like those of elephant, those with big feet, those with cow like feet, 
those with hair on their feet, those with big heads and necks, those with big nipples and big stomach, those with 
big eyes and mouths, with long tongues and nails, and also the a face like that of a she-goat, those with elephant 
like face, those with face like that of a cow, those with face of a she-pig, those with faces like those of horses, 
camels, donkeys, those with horrible appearance, ogresses carrying pikes and clubs in their hand, angry ones, 
those who like quarrels, those with high teeth, with hair color like that of smoke, with horrible faces, always 
drinking liquor, always desiring meat and liquor, with body smeared by meat and blood, with meat and blood as 
food, whose appearance made hair to stand up, sitting around a great tree with huge trunk.

Hanuma the glorious one saw that Seetha, the princess, daughter of Janaka, unblemished one below 
that tree.

She was lack luster being tormented by grief, with hair covered by dirt, with merits exhausted, 
like star fallen from heavens onto ground.

She was rich with fame of lofty character, poor due to not seeing husband, lacking excellent ornaments, 
with husband's love as ornament.

Being held captive by Ravana, without any relatives, She was like a she-elephant without herd, 
being detained by a lion.

She was like moon being covered by clouds at the end of rainy season with an appearance lacking 
lustre due to lack of contact with husband, was like an unplucked Veena.

Hanuma saw Seetha being suited to be with her husband, in the custody of ogresses, in the middle 
of Ashoka garden being immersed in an ocean of grief

Hanuma saw Seetha there surrounded by those ogresses, like Rohini with planets, like a creeper 
without flowers.

With body smeared with dirt, being graced by Her body, that Seetha shone and also did not shine, 
like a lotus-fibre covered with dirt.

The monkey Hanuma saw that Seetha with great beauty with black eyes, covered by a cloth which was 
creased and dirty, with eyes of a deer, with a pitiful face, not depressed due to the brilliance of her husband, 
protected by her own character.

Hanuma became happy on seeing Seetha with eyes of a fawn, fearful like a she-deer, seeing trees 
with young shoots, as though being burnt by sighs, like a bundle of grief, with a wave of sorrow risen up.

Hanuma the son of wind god on seeing Seetha that Seetha like the goddess earth, with well divided 
body parts shining eve without ornaments, obtained great joy.

Hanuma on seeing Seetha there with intoxicating eyes shed tears of joy and also paid obeisance 
to Sri Rama.

Being joyful on seeing Seetha, Hanuma the mighty one paid obeisance to Sri Rama and to Lakshmana 
and became covered with leaves.

undefined

undefined

undefined


That Hanuma the best among Vanaras, the great radiant one, the long armed one,
conquered with His might the best Lanka who is capable of assuming desired form. He then leapt over
the city wall at a place that was not a gate.


Desiring the benefit of the king of Vanaras Sugreeva, that Hanuma entered the city
of Lanka and thus actually placed His left foot on the enemies' heads.


That son of Vayu endowed with great strength, entered the city at night and took the
grand road shone by flowers and pearls. After that Hanuma went towards that beautiful city of
Lanka.


The beautiful city shone like the sky together with clouds, with its cloud like
houses filled with sounds of laughter and with sounds of musical instruments at the interior, equal
in strength to diamonds and clubs and with windows decorated with diamonds.


Then that city of Lanka shone brilliantly being well decorated by the houses of
Rakshasas. These were modern houses which equalled white clouds, which were surprising with the
shape of lotus and swastika and which were auspicious.


That glorious Hanuma, performer of beneficial deeds for Sugreeva the king of
monkeys, moved around the city of Lanka which had wonderful garlands and jewellery, for the sake of
Sri Rama. He saw the city and became happy too.


Going from one building to another, Hanuma saw buildings in various shapes and forms
on every side.


Hanuma heard a sweet song which was decorated by sound from the three svaras -
Mandra, Madhya and Tara of love lorne women like Apsara women in heaven.


Hanuma also heard there and there sound from the tinkling of ornaments worn around
the waist in the houses of wealthy people, sounds of footfall over stair, sound from clapping of
arms by warriors and roar of ogres.


Hanuma also heard there and there sound from the tinkling of ornaments worn around
the waist in the houses of wealthy people, sounds of footfall over stair, sound from clapping of
arms by warriors and roar of ogres.


There Hanuma heard ritual chantings muttered by rakshasas in their houses. He saw
ogres engaged in study of Vedas. He also saw roaring rakshasas who came together to praise
Ravana.


He saw many spies of Ravana and a big army of ogres which stood surrounding the
royal highway in the central zone of city.


Hanuma saw those who were initiated into various Vedic practices, those who wore
matted locks on their head, those who had shaven heads, those who wore cow hides and other
clothing, those who were carrying Kusa grass as weapons and also those who had fire vessels as
weapons, those who carried hammers and clubs in their hands and also those who had worn staffs as
weapons, hose who were one-eyed, those who had one ear, hose who were pot-bellied and with hanging
breast, those who had horrible appearances, those with twisted mouths, those who were horrific and
also short people, those who carried bows and arrows those who carried swords, those who carried
pestles and clubs as weapons, those who carried excellent Parighas in their hands, those who shone
with strange armour, those who were not very fat, those who were not too thin, those who were
neither tall nor short, those who were not very fair, those who were not very dark, those who were
not very hunchbacked, those who were not very short, those who had great brilliance, those who
carried banners, those who carried flags and those who carried different weapons.


Hanuma saw many people, who had great might, who carried javelins and trees as
weapons, those who carried Pattisas and thunderbolts, those who carried in their hands sling and
nooses, those who carried flowered garlands, wearing sandal paste and decorated with best
jewellery, those who had various kinds of appearances roaming freely at will, those who carried
sharp spikes and thunderbolts.


Hanuma saw at the front of inner city, a hundred thousand central protective force
which was attentive and was positioned there at the command of Ravana.


That Hanuma saw Ravana's house with a golden doorway. That famed house was on the
top of a mountain. Motes filled with white lotuses surrounded it. It was also surrounded by a
compound wall. He watched the house again and again.


The great Hanuma entered secretly Ravana's inner city which was equal to paradise,
rendered noisy by neighing of horses and tinkling of ornaments, by chariots, vehicles and
aerial-cars and decorated by auspicious elephants and horses and great elephants with four tusks
and by birds and animals in heat. It had beautiful entrances and was protected by thousands of
rakshasas with great strength.


Hanuma entered the inner city of Ravana which was filled with gold, which had a
golden court-yard , with a central area decorated by pearls and diamonds of great value and
sprinkled daily with water containing superb algallocum and sandal-wood.


Thus, this is the 4th chapter in Sundara Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana, the First Epic
poem of India.

undefined

undefined

undefined

That Seetha, hearing those unpleasant words of Ravana, tormented by grief, was frightened like 
a tiny female-elephant overpowered by a lion in the middle of a forest.

That fearful Seetha, who was situated in the middle of female-demons and also threatened by Ravana 
with his words galore, lamented (as follows) like a young virgin who was left lonely in the midst of a forest.

"Truly the saints affirm that untimely death does not come in the world, as I being impure am surviving 
even for an instant, though being threatened in this way."

"Though devoid of happiness and frequently full of sorrow, my heart must be hard indeed, in that 
it does not break into a thousand pieces today like a mountain-top struck by lightning."

"There is no fault of mine in this matter. I have become killable at the hands of this demon of 
disagreeable perception. I am not able to give him my affection any more than a member of the twice-born classes 
would offer a mystical verse to one not belonging to the twice-born classes."

"If Rama the Ruler of the world does not come here, the evil Ravana, the king of Demons will cut 
off my limbs with his sharpened weapons, even as a surgeon would cut the limbs of a lifeless feotus."

"To me lamenting, two months will go up to a long time, as at the end of a night a thief imprisoned 
and to be capitally punished under the detention orders of a king. Alas! This is painful."

"O Rama, O Lakshmana, O Sumitra, O Kausalya! O mother! I, of a scanty fortune, am going to be destroyed, 
like a ship driven out of its course by a strong wind in a mighty ocean."

"In the disguise of a deer, those two energetic sons of Dasaratha were surely killed for my sake, 
as two excellent lions killed by a flashing thunderbolt."

"Certainly that Time-spirit, assuming the guise of a deer, allured me, a woman of poor fortune 
at that time and to whom I, a stupid woman, sent forth (far away) Lakshmana and the noble prince Rama the elder 
brother of Lakshmana."

"O Rama, the strictly truthful man and the long-armed, O the man whose face resembles the full-moon! 
You, who are well-disposed of the world of living beings, do not indeed know me to have been sentenced to death 
by the demons."

"My not having a deity (other than my husband), this patience, my reposing on the floor, my restriction 
in righteousness, my devotion to the husband - all this has become a waste, like a good act done by men to ungrateful 
men becoming waste".

"For me who is not seeing you, who is bereft of you, who is not hopeful of coming into contact 
with you, who is emaciated and pale in complexion this righteous act performed by me has indeed become a waste. 
Likewise, this state of my being only one wife to you has become useless.."

"Having fulfilled your father's command as per the order of his words and observed your vow, you 
return from the forest fearlessly and having accomplished your purpose, I think you will enjoy carnally with large-eyed 
women."

"O Rama! Having performed austerity and vow in vain, I for myself who has fallen in love with you 
and in whose was confined an affection for you for a long time, for my own destruction, I can lose my life. Woe 
to me of my little fortune!"

"I as such will abandon quickly my life by poison or by a sharp weapon. To me, none is there, who 
is a giver either of a poison or of a sharp weapon in the house of Ravana."

Thus lamenting in several ways, Seetha was recollecting Rama in all spirits and trembling with 
and emaciated face, approached that excellent tree in bloom.

Seetha, who was tormented with grief, thus thinking in various ways and thereafter holding her 
braid of hair looking like a hanging rope (now thought within herself) "I shall go to the presence of Yama the 
God of Death by tying my neck quickly with my braid of hair looking like a hanging rope"

Thereafter Seetha with all her soft limbs stood seizing a branch of that tree. To her having handsome 
limbs, who was thinking of Rama, Lakshmana and her own race, then appeared many omens, which were not having adequate 
occasion for grief, which procured courage in the world, which were excellent and which were seen earlier also 
as thoroughly efficacious.

undefined

undefined

undefined

The valiant Hanuma also heard truly all those words of Seetha, Trijata and the threatening words 
of the female demons.

Thereafter, seeing that Seetha as a divine lady in the garden of Nandana, Hanuma echoed his thought 
in various ways.

"Which Seetha is being searched in all directions by many thousands and myriads of monkeys, the 
same Seetha has been found by me."

"By me, employed thoughtfully (by my Master) as a secret agent and gone about secretly with a view 
to ascertain the enemy's strength, this has been perceived.

"The characteristics of demons, this town and the power of the king of demons, Ravana, have been 
perceived by me."

"It is proper for me to console the wife of Rama, desirous of seeing her husband who is compassionate 
towards all beings and who is of immeasurable might."

"I shall console this woman, whose face resembles a full moon, who is having an unforeseen affliction, 
who is tormented by grief and who is not attaining the end to her affliction."

"If I return without consoling this Seetha, the wife of Rama, even though her mind is tormented 
by grief, my departure becomes blemished."

"Not finding a rescue when I return to Kishkindha, the illustrious princess Seetha may give up 
her life."

"That long-armed Rama having the countenance of a full moon, eagerly longing to see Seetha, is 
fit to be consoled by me."

"It is not proper to speak with her within the sight of these female-demons. How indeed is this 
to be done? I am indeed perplexed."

"If she is not consoled by me during the rest of this night, she will forsake her life by all means. 
There is no doubt about it."

"If Rama enquires of me as to what words did Seetha speak about him, what can I say to Rama without 
speaking now to this Seetha, the slender-waisted lady?"

"To me returning in haste from here without carrying Seetha's message Rama may get irritated and 
burn me up with his pungent eyes."

"Even if I instigate my master Sugreeva to do his best in the cause of Rama, his arrival here with 
an army will be futile."

"Staying here itself and getting hold of an opportunity even in the midst of the female-demons 
(when they are in attentive), I shall slowly console Seetha who is very much in distress."

"However, I am very small in stature, particularly as a monkey and can speak now Sanskrit, the 
human language too."

"If I use Sanskrit language like a brahmin, Seetha will get frightened, thinking me as Ravana. 
Especially, how can a monkey speak it?"

"Certainly, meaningful words of a human being are to be spoken by me. Otherwise, the virtuous Seetha 
cannot be consoled."

"Looking at my figure and the language, Seetha who was already frightened previously by the demons, 
will get frightened again."

"Thereafter, this large-eyed Seetha who is full of mind, thinking me as Ravana who can assume any 
form at will, may shout loudly, engendered by fear."

"As soon as Seetha shouts loudly, a troop of female-demons, wielding various kinds of weapons and 
appearing dreadful as Yama the Lord of Death, may assemble here."

"Then those ugly faced female-demons may encircle me from all sides and try to catch and kill me 
with all their might."

"Then, seeing me running hither and thither, seizing big branches, twigs and trunks of excellent 
trees, they may get alarmed with fear."

"The ugly faced female-demons will be frightened with fear, after seeing my huge figure wandering 
in the grove."

"Then those female-demons may call the other demons too retained by Ravana in his house."

"Those female-demons with an element of turbulence and rapidity may rush into a battle with various 
kinds of weapons like spears lances and swords."

"Surrounded on all sides by them, I may not be able to reach the other shore of the great ocean, 
while destroying the army of demons."

"Or having jumped up (over me) many demons operating speedily may capture me. Then, Seetha may 
not be able to know the occurrence of my arrival. Even I may get captured too."

"Or the violent minded demons may kill this Seetha. Consequently this work of Rama and Sugreeva 
will be ruined."

"Seetha is residing in this secret place, with a concealed access, surrounded by demons and encircled 
by an ocean."

"If I am killed in the battle or got captured by the demons, I do not see any other companion for 
Rama who can fulfill this work (of searching for Seetha)."

"Even after due reflection, I do not see any monkey who can transgress the ocean with a breadth 
of one hundred Yojanas, in case I am killed."

"I am competent to kill even thousands of demons. I am quite sure. But, after doing such a large 
battle, I may not be capable of reaching the other shore of the ocean."

'Conflicts are unreal too and to me, there is no desire for uncertainty. which intellectual will 
do an assured act with an apprehension?"

"If I do not talk, there will be Seetha's death. If I talk to Seetha, this great lapse will occur."

"Actions which are going to be accomplished shortly, get spoiled at the hands of a accomplished 
shortly, get spoiled at the hands of a confused messenger, when the actions are set in opposition to time and 
space, even as darkness disappears at sun rise."

"Even if a decision is taken, regarding what is worthy and what is worthless, it does not yield 
good results. Messengers boasting themselves to be learned, thus indeed ruin those actions."

"How does not my work get spoiled? How should I avoid my feebleness? Also how does not my leaping 
across the sea become vain?"

"How can Seetha hear my words without fear?" Thinking in this way, the wise Hanuma made up his 
mind (as follows):

"If I eulogize Rama, who is unwearied in action and a good relation, I shall not frighten her, 
whose mind is directed towards that relation."

"Offering auspicious and righteous words about Rama the most excellent prince Ikshvaku dynasty 
who possesses a learned soul and myself speaking in a sweet voice, I shall make everything intelligible so that 
Seetha rightly believes everything."

The noble-minded Hanuman, abiding in the midst of the twigs of the trees and seeing Seetha, spoke 
the following words of many kinds which were not futile.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Seeing that highly energetic Ravana, the courageous Hanuma coolly spoke to him the following 
meaningful words:

"O king of demons! By the command of Sugreeva, I came here to your abode. Sugreeva, the 
Lord of monkeys, your brother, asked me to enquire about your welfare.

"Hear the righteous and meaningful words, as a following advice, of the high-souled Sugreeva, 
your brother, conducive to good in the world as well as in the other world."

"There was a king named Dasaratha, having chariots, elephants and horses, like a father 
to the people and endowed with a splendour equal to that of Indra the lord of celestials."

"His eldest son named Rama, having mighty arms, a bestower of affection and our lord, 
by the command of his father, abiding in a righteous path, went out on exile and entered a forest called 
Dandaka along with Lakshmana his brother and Seetha his wife."

"Seetha, wife of Rama, devoted to her husband and daughter of the high-souled king, named 
Janaka, the head of Videha kingdom, got lost in the forest."

"That prince, Rama together with his brother, searching that lady, reached Mount Rishyamuka 
and happened to meet Sugreeva."

"While Sugreeva promised Rama to get Seetha searched, Rama too promised to get the kingdom 
of monkeys to Sugreeva."

"Thereafter, killing Vali in a combat, Rama installed Sugreeva on the throne as a lord 
of that troop monkeys and bears."

"You may indeed know Vali, the foremost among monkeys, previously. Rama killed that Vali 
with a single arrow in battle."

"Sugreeva, the lord of monkeys, true to his promise, was intent on searching for Seetha 
and sent his monkeys to all directions."

"Hundreds, thousands and lakhs of monkeys are searching for her in all quarters, as also 
below and above in the sky."

"Among those monkeys, some mighty and virile monkeys are similar to Garuda the eagle. 
Some are like wind, swiftly going with an unhindered movement."

"I am, however, an own son of wind-god and named as Hanuma. I came here even by crossing 
quickly the ocean, which is a hundred yojanas (or eight hundred miles) wide for the sake of Seetha and 
wishing to see her."

"While strolling around in the city of Lanka, I found Seetha in your abode. You know 
about religious merit and wealth. You performed and mastered the austerities. That is why, you ought 
not besiege the wife of another, O great intellectual!"

"Intellectuals like you indeed are not engrossed in acts, which are antagonistic to righteousness, 
which are attended with many dangers and which even ruin the doer at the roots."

"Who is capable even among celestials and demons, to withstand the arrows discharged 
by Lakshmana, in the wake of the fury of Rama?

"O king! No one is known in the three worlds, who have gained happiness, by doing harm 
to Rama."

"That is why, accede to my words, which are beneficial for all the three divisions of 
time (viz. the past, present and future), resulting in affluence and respectability as well. Let Seetha 
be restored to Rama."

"I beheld Seetha, the princess. The audience of Seetha is difficult to be achieved and 
it is obtained here. It is for Rama there to decide his remaining task of future consequence."

"Capturing Seetha, whom you do not recognize as a five-hooded female serpent in your 
abode, has been found by me in that manner, and wholly given over to sorrow."

"She is incapable of being devoured with one's might even by celestials and demons, any 
more than food mixed with abundant poison could be digested with one's digestive power, if consumed."

"It is not proper for you to lose your exceptional longevity and that fortune which is 
an outcome of your virtue, both of which have been acquired by you through the practice of austerities."

"You may be thinking that you are immune from death from demons and celestials, because 
of your austerities. But your opinion in that matter is not correct, on account of the following reason.

"This Sugreeva is indeed neither a god, nor Asura the chief of evil spirits nor a demon 
nor a child of Danu the demon, nor Gandharva the celestial musician nor Yaksha the semi-divine being 
nor pannaga the serpent-demon. O King! How do you protect your life from him?"

"The fruit of righteousness does not exist together with the result of unrighteousness 
(eventhough he practices virtue). That consequence of unrighteousness alone follows him. Righteousness 
in abundance destroys unrighteousness."

"You already obtained the fruit of virtue till now. There is no doubt about it. In no 
time, you will obtain the fruit of unrighteousness also."

"Recognizing the killing of demons in the forest of Janasthana, about the killing of 
Vali and about the friendship between Rama and Sugreeva, realize your own interest."

"I am indeed, even alone, undoubtedly, destroying Lanka, along with its horses, chariots 
and elephants. However, this is not in accordance with the resolution of Rama."

"For, Rama, indeed, promised in the presence of troops of monkeys and bears, about the 
extermination of enemies, by whom Seetha was actually laid violent hands upon."

"Even Indra the Lord of celestials, in person, cannot attain happiness if he does any 
harm to Rama. How much move to another person like you?"

"Know her, whom you recognize as Seetha and who stays in your captivity, to be none else 
than Kalaratri (the goddess presiding over and responsible for dissolution), who can destroy the entire 
Lanka."

"Therefore, have it enough of this noose of death, in the form of Seetha's personality, 
which has been placed by yourself around your neck. Think well of your safety."

"See; (in the immediate future), this city of Lanka, burnt away by the effulgence of 
Seetha and the City too being scorched with its markets and main streets, afflicted by the wrath of 
Rama."

"Do not lead to extermination your own friends, counsellors, kinsmen, brothers, sons, 
well-wishers, enjoyments, wives and Lanka."

"O king of demons! Listen to my truthful words coming as it is from the lips of this 
servant of Rama, his messenger and particularly of this monkey."

"The renowned Rama is capable of totally destroying all the worlds together with its 
five elements, along with its animate and inanimate things and also to create yet again all the worlds 
in like manner as before."

"The renowned Rama, who is equal in prowess to Vishnu the lord of the preservation and 
among celestials, demons or the foremost of men, or among hordes of Yakshas the semi-divine beings or 
ogres or among all Vidyadharas, a king of super-natural beings or among Gandharvas the celestials musicians 
or among Uragas the semi-divine serpents or among Siddhas the holy personages having super-natural powers 
or among excellent Kinnaras the mythical beings with human figure and head of a horse or among all types 
of birds or among all living beings at all places and at all times."

"After doing a great harm in this manner to Rama the lord of all worlds as well as the 
lion among kings, your survival will be difficult."

"O king of demons! Either celestials or demons or Gandharvas the celestial musicians 
or Vidyadharas a king of super-natural beings or Nagas the semi-divine serpents or Yakshas the semi 
divine beings-all of them are not able to stand before Rama the lord of the three worlds."

"Either Brahma the self-existing god with four faces or Rudra with three eyes and the 
destroyer of Tripura (the city built of gold, silver and iron in the sky, air and earth, by Maya for 
the demons and burnt by Shiva), or Mahendra the god of atmosphere and sky as also the lord of celestials 
would not be able to protect the one to be killed by Rama in battle."

Hearing those unpleasant words endowed with extreme skillfulness and which were spoken 
without fear from Hanuma, that unequalled Ravana ordered for the killing of that Hanuma.

undefined

undefined

undefined

At the screaming sound of birds and at the sound of the crash of falling trees, all the 
inhabitants of Lanka then became trembled with fear.

Made to run to-and-fro and getting frightened, beasts and birds began to scream. Atrocious 
omens made their appearance before the demons.

Then, the ugly-faced female-demons, whose sleep has vanished, found that grove demolished 
and saw that great heroic monkey.

Seeing those female-demons, the mighty armed Hanuma endowed with a great courage and 
might, assumed a gigantic form which created a terror to the female-demons.

Beholding that mighty monkey having a gigantic body similar to a mountain, the female-demons 
then asked Seetha (as follows):

"Who is he? Whose messenger is he? From where and for what purpose he has come here? 
Wherefore a conversation was held by him with you?"

"O large-eyed Seetha! Tell us. Let there be no fear for you, O fortunate lady! What did 
he speak to you? O lady having black outer eye-corners!"

Thereupon Seetha the virtuous lady, having a complete beauty of all limbs, spoke as follows: 
"Where is the ability for me to know about the demons of a terrific form?"

"You alone can recognise who he is and what he does. A serpent only can recognise the 
feet of another serpent. There is no doubt about it."

"By seeing him, I too get frightened. I do not know who he is. I only know him as a demon, 
able to assume any form at his will, who arrived here."

Hearing the words of Seetha some female-demons fled to different directions. Some stayed 
back. Some others went to Ravana to inform about the matter.

After approaching Ravana, the female demons of ugly faces started to tell (as follows) 
of the monstrous and terrific monkey.

"O king! A monkey having a terrific body and a boundless prowess, is stationed in the 
middle of Ashoka grove and made a conversation with Seetha."

"Eventhough questioned in many ways by us, Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, having eyes 
similar to those of a doe, is not inclined to tell about the monkey."

"He may be a messenger of Indra the Lord of celestials, or the messenger of Kubera the 
king of riches or even a messenger sent by Rama to search for Seetha."

"He, having a wonderful form, has wiped off your grove, attached to the gynaecium, which 
is fascinating and extending with many kinds of animal-flock."

"There is no place whatsoever in that grove, which was not destroyed by him. Only that 
place, where Seetha the daughter of Janaka was sitting, was not destroyed by him."

"It is not known whether to protect Seetha or because of fatigue, he has left that place 
undestroyed, or else, what fatigue is there for him? He has done it to protect Seetha."

"That well-grown Simsupa tree, abounding in charming sprouts and flowers, under which 
Seetha herself took shelter, has been spared by him."

To that terribly looking monkey by whom Seetha was spoken to and that grove destroyed you to order a terrible punishment.

"O chief of the demons-troops! Who would dare to talk to that Seetha, who has been mentally 
accepted by you, except perhaps he who is ready to abandon his life?"

Hearing the words of the female-demons, Ravana the lord of demons flared up like a funeral 
fire, his eyes spinning with anger.

Tears dropped from Ravana's enraged eyes, like drops of oil dripping from resplendent 
lamps.

Ravana, with a great splendour, sent demons with a valiance equal to him, called Kinkaras, 
in order to catch hold of Hanuma.

He ordered for eighty thousand of those Kinkaras who were strong. All those mighty Kinkaras 
with their large bellies, long tusks and terrible forms, longing to fight with iron mallets and clubs 
in hand, in eagerness to lay hold on Hanuma, started from that place.

Approaching Hanuma who was standing near the arched doorway, they rushed towards him 
with a great speed, like locusts rushing towards a fire.

They banged Hanuma with various kinds of maces, iron bludgeons plated with gold and arrows 
shining like the sun.

Quickly surrounding Hanuma with clubs, sharp edged spears, iron pikes, lances, javelins 
and swords, they stood in front of him.

The highly splendorous and illustrious Hanuma too, looking like a mountain, hurled his 
tail on the ground, making a thunderous noise.

The highly splendourous and illustrious Hanuma too, looking like a mountain, hurled his 
tail on the ground, making a thunderous noise.

By that great sound made by Hanuma through clapping on his arms together with a resound, 
birds fell down from the sky. Hanuma also then cried aloud with a clamorous voice (as follows):

"Long live the mighty Rama and the powerful Lakshmana! Long live the King Sugreeva, protected 
by Rama!"

"I am Hanuma, the destroyer of the army of adversaries and the son of wind-god. I am 
the servant of Rama, the king of Kosala Kingdom, who is unwearied in action."

"Even a thousand of Ravanas will not be matching equally with me, who is capable of striking 
with thousands of rocks and trees in battle."

"Here, before the eyes of all the demons, I will annihilate the City of Lanka and after 
offering salutation to Seetha, I will go back after fully completing my task."

Those demons became frightened by the clamorous voice of Hanuma cried aloud and saw him 
to be as high as a twilight rain-cloud.

Not feeling apprehended because of the orders of their king, those demons thereafter 
rushed towards Hanuma, with their terrific and amazing weapons.

Surrounded on all sides by those strong demons, that Hanuma endowed with a great strength 
seized a huge iron bar belonging to the arched gate.

Taking that iron rod, Hanuma killed the demons. That violent Hanuma strolled in the sky, 
taking that iron rod in his hand, as Garuda the eagle would carrying a serpent in its claws.

Killing the valiant demons called Kinkaras, that heroic Hanuma wishing to fight again, 
arrived at the archy gate way.

Some demons, who somehow escaped from that terror, went to Ravana and informed him that 
all the Kinkaras have been killed.

Hearing of large army of demons having been killed, that Ravana with his eyes rolling 
rapidly (with anger), ordered Jambumali, son of Prahasta, who was unequal in prowess and admirably unconquerable 
in battle.

undefined

undefined

undefined

That Hanuma being there, seeing and searching for Seetha, observing all that land, explored 
	the garden.

That Hanuma being there observed closely that Ashoka garden shone by Santanaka creepers, Santana 
	trees with heavenly aroma and juice, well decorated in all directions equalling the garden of Nandana, surrounded 
	by animals and birds, congested with mansions and palaces, resounded with the notes of cuckoos, decorated 
	with wells having golden water lilies, lotuses and with many chairs and carpets; with many sub-terrain houses, 
	beautiful trees, with trees with flowers of all seasons and with fruit, with the radiance of raising sun, 
	by the glory of ashoka trees in bloom, as though radiant as though being made to be with branches without 
	leaves, by hundreds of birds perching again and again, Ashoka trees with wonderful flowers as head decoration, 
	with flowers spread till the roots destroying leaves, with weight of groups of flowers as touching the earth 
	with karnolaara trees; in blossom with Kimkusa trees in full blossom.

By the radiance of those trees that region was as though lit in all directions. Punnaaga trees 
	with flatted roots and in full blossom, Saptaparna trees Campaka and Uddalaka trees were shining.

There in that garden of Ashoka there were thousands of Ashoka trees some equalling gold, some 
	equalling fire, some equalling the precious stone Niila and Anjana.

Like the garden of Nandana, a celestial garden, wonderful like Caitraratham, a garden of Kubera, 
	surpassing all, unfathomable, an excellent one, a beautiful one consisting of glory together with flowers 
	like clusters of stars, like a second sky wonderful with flowers, like hundreds of diamonds, like a second 
	ocean with flowers of all seasons, spread with trees having the smell of honey, beautiful with groups of animals 
	of various sounds, diffused with many smells with an auspicious soul pleasing smell.

That monkey warrior Hanuma saw not far away in that Ashoka garden, in the middle, a lofty temple 
	filled with fragrance like a second Gandhamadana Mountain, standing by a thousand pillars, white like Mount 
	Kailaasa with stairs made of corals with platforms made of refined gold as though radiant with glory, clear 
	and because of being tall as though scraping the sky.

Thereafter Hanuma saw Seetha wearing a soiled garment, surrounded by rakshasa women, emaciated 
	due to fasting, looking miserable, sighing again and again, like the pure crescent moon at the beginning of 
	a bright fortnight.

With a form that slowly came out like a tongue of fire, of beautiful radiance covered by smoke.

Covered by a single best cloth of yellow colour, which was wrinkled, without any decorations 
	like a lotus plant without lotuses, together with mud.

Bashful, tortured by sorrow worn out in a pitiable condition like the constellation Rohini, 
	pressed by the planet mars.

With a face full of tears in a pitiable condition, emaciated due to not taking food, immersed 
	in thought with gloom, always in a pitiable state, surrendering to sorrow.

Not seeing dear people, seeing groups of demonesses, like a female deer loosing her own herd 
	surrounded by group of hounds.

With a braid with the radiance of a single black serpent reaching hinder part, like the earth 
	with dark green groups of trees during the end of rainy season, deserving of comforts, tormented by grief, 
	not accustomed to calamities.

Observing that woman with wide eyes, very untidy, emaciated, Hanuma thought that this is indeed 
	Seetha on logical grounds.

Then, while being abducted by that rakshasa with the ability to assume desired form in whatever 
	way, She was seen, this woman has the same form.

Hanuma saw Seetha with a face like full moon, with beautiful eyebrows, with graceful rounded 
	breasts, by the radiance making all directions without darkness, goddess like with black hair, with lips like 
	bimba fruit, with a good waist, very firm, with eyes like lotus petals, like Rati the consort of god of love.

As the light of full moon, dear to all world, like an ascetic woman leading austere life sitting 
	on bare ground with a good body.

Sighing a lot like the consort of lord of serpents in fright, not radiant by sorrow which was 
	great and extensive.

Hanuma saw Her like a tongue of fire mixed with column of smoke, like an intellect together 
	with doubts, like a cast away treasure.

Like shattered faith, like frustrated hope, like success together with obstacles, like an impure 
	mind.

Like fame that has fallen down by a false scandal, tortured by the obstruction caused to Rama, 
	emaciated due to the abduction by Ravana.

With eyes like those of a young doe full of tears, with black and oblique eye-brows, with a 
	cheerless countenance, seeing there and there, being helpless, sighing again and again.

Wearing a coat of dust, pitiable one, although suited for decorations undecorated, like the 
	radiance of the moon, the lord of stars, covered by black clouds.

Seeing Seetha like knowledge in ruin for want of repeated study, that Hanuma's mind got repeatedly 
	doubtful.

Hanuma recognized with great sorrow Seetha not decorated, like a sentence which got a different 
	meaning being devoid of culture.

Seeing that princess, the wide eyed one, blameless one, Hanuma reasoned her to be Seetha for 
	the following reasons.

Then Hanuma saw whatever groups of jewellery of Seetha on various parts Rama spoke, those charming 
	Her limbs, well made earrings, well fitting Svadamstras and ornaments wonderful with diamonds on the limbs 
	of Her hands, belonging to body for long time, blackened and making marks on body.

"I think all these to be same about which Rama spoke; among them whatever have been worn out 
	those I will not see; whatever jewels of Her are not worn out these are they - no doubt."

That upper garment yellow with a shine like a golden plate, auspicious one, being dropped had 
	been seen caught in a tree then by vanaras.

"Dropped on the earth by Her, ornaments also great and important, those making sound have been 
	seen."

"This cloth being worn for a long time has worn out a lot, even then definitely it is of the 
	same colour, like the other upper garment; in the same way this is glorious."

"This She of golden colour is indeed Rama's dear wife; who ever Seetha the chaste one, even 
	though not seen, is not gone from Rama's heart."

"This is She for whose sake Rama tormented in four ways from compassion from pity from grief 
	from love; (thinking that) a woman has disappeared from compassion, depending on him from pity, wife has been 
	lost from grief, a dear one from love."

"In whatever way is this lady's appearance, elegance of major and minor limbs, in the same 
	way is Rama's. In whatever way His appearance, in the same way is this black-eyed one's appearance."

"This lady's heart is in Rama, His heart is firmly in Her, for that reason She and that noble 
	Rama are able to live even for a moment."

"Lord Rama losing Her has done an impossible task in that He still preserved His body, in that 
	He did not die from grief."

Hanuma, then seeing Seetha became happy thus and went by mind to Rama and also praised that 
	Lord.

undefined

undefined

undefined

In that house, while observing, Hanuma saw a portion of house with beds and couches, consisting 
of best couches equaling those in heaven, made of crystal decorated with diamonds, with wonderful parts made of 
ivory and gold, covered with best beds made of cat's eye gems of great value.

Hanuma saw in a part of that room, an umbrella white in colour decorated with best flower garlands 
and resembling moon - the lord of stars.

Hanuma saw an excellent couch made of gold with radiance equaling that of fire, spread by garlands 
of Ashoka flowers.

Fanned by women with fans in their hands in all the four directions and obtained by various fragrances 
fumigated by the best incense.

Covered by an excellent bed, spread by sheep skin everywhere and shone by rows of excellent garlands.

Hanuma saw Ravana in that house, equaling a cloud, wearing earrings with a brilliant shine with 
red eyes and with long arms wearing gold clothes.

With his body smeared with red sandal-wood with good fragrance like a cloud in the red sky at sunset, 
together with groups of lightening.

Ravana was filled with excellent jewellery, with a good appearance, with an ability to assume desired 
form, resembling mount Mandara in sleep, together with groups of trees and bushes.

Resting after having pleasure at night, bedecked with the best ornaments, he was a lover to the 
rakshasa girls and causing comfort to rakshasas.

That great Hanuma saw the gallant king of rakshasas in sleep on a shining couch resting after drinking.

That Hanuma, best among Vanaras neared Ravana, became very gloomy and moved away with great dread, 
as though from a hissing serpent.

Thereafter the great Hanuma neared staircase, sought another dais and observed closely Ravana.

The excellent couch of the sleeping Ravana shone like a great lake when a scented elephant resides 
in it.

That Hanuma also saw the wealthy Ravana's arms tied with golden armlets thrown apart, resembling 
flag staffs raised in honor of Indra.

Those arms had wounds made by stabbing from the pointed edges of tusks of Iraavata and fleshy shoulders 
smeared with diamond and hit by Vishnu chakra.

These arms of Ravana were corpulent with well grown and equal strong shoulders proportionate to 
body, with knees and thumbs of good characteristics, with good fingers and palms.

With strong joints in the shape of club, round in shape resembling the trunks of an elephant, like 
five headed snakes thrown on clean couch.

Shoulders well smeared by best sandal with good smell and very cool resembling in color to a hare's 
blood, well decorated, massaged by the best women, served by the best sandal and which made yakshas, nagas, gandharvas, 
devas and daanavaas scream.

That Hanuma saw there arms on the couch like great serpents in anger sleeping in the middle of 
mount Mandara.

That king of Rakshasas equaling a mountain with those shoulders, which were well built and shone 
like Mount Mandara with twin peaks.

From the great face of that king of Rakshasas who was sleeping, came out breath with fragrance 
like that of flowers of chuuta and punnaaga, consisting of the best fragrance of Vakula flowers, together with 
the flavor of best cooked rice, with the smell of liquor as though filling that house.

That Hanuma saw in the house of that king of Rakshasa's, wives at the feet, Ravana being a gigantic 
one with loving wives, shone with crown tilted to the side, having strange hue with pearls and diamonds and of 
golden colour, with a face made brilliant by earrings, shone with the chest region smeared with red sandal, shining 
with a necklace wide, high and corpulent with a silk cloth of white colour falling on him, with eyes reddish like 
blood, well tied by a best cloth of yellow colour and of very best quality, resembling a heap of black beans, 
snoring like a hiss of a snake, like an elephant sleeping in the middle of water belonging to the great river 
Ganga with all the four directions shone by the four lamps of golden colour, resembling a cloud with all the parts 
being shone by groups of lighting.

The leader of Vanaras saw those wives of Ravana with faces with radiance of moon, adorned with 
beautiful earrings, wearing jewellery and flower garlands which were not worn out.

Hanuma saw wives of Ravana with skill in dance and musical instruments, who obtained the shoulders 
of Ravana wearing the best jewellery and being in sleep.

He saw earrings of those women at the end of ears with embedded diamonds and cats eye gems and 
having golden colour.

With the faces of those women with delicate earrings which were equal to moon and auspicious that 
house shone like the sky with clusters of stars.

Women of that Ravana being tired from lustful passion and exertion and having lean waists slept 
at first opportunity.

Another woman with skill in dancing consisting of delicate body postures slept in the same way 
with all her body parts making the same dance postures.

One woman hugging veena and sleeping was shining like a lotus plant thrown away by the flow of 
a great river and resorting a boat.

Another woman with black eyes sleeping with an instrument called madduka under arm pit shone like 
a woman carrying an infant boy with love.

A woman with beautiful body features and with beautiful breasts slept tightly and hugged instrument 
called pataha as though hugging a lover, getting him after a long time.

Another woman with lotus like eyes hugging a flute slept like a woman with lust holding her lover 
in secret.

Another woman skilled in dance obtained sleep getting an instrument like veena and being in tune 
with it like a woman together with her lover.

Another woman with lusty eyes slept hugging a percussion instrument called mridanga with her body 
parts which were pleasant which resembled gold and which were smooth and fleshy.

Another woman with thin stomach, who was not to be blamed, slept due to tiresomeness from lust 
together with an instrument called Padama between her shoulders and reaching arm pits.

Another woman with an instrument called Dindima near her slept in the same way as a woman hugging 
her husband and also her child.

Another woman with eyes like lotus petals slept making the instrument called adambara pressing 
it by her shoulders being desired by lust.

Another woman sleeping, felling down a small pot, shone like a flower garland with the flowers 
of strange hue made auspicious in spring.

Another woman slept hugging her breasts resembling golden pots by her hands, overcome with sleep.

Another woman with eyes like lotus petals, with her face resembling full moon, overcome with lust 
slept hugging another woman with a beautiful hip region.

Some excellent women slept hugging strange instruments and pressing them with breasts as though 
lustful woman with lusty men.

That Hanuma saw among those women a very beautiful woman sleeping on an auspicious couch arranged 
alone at a side.

Hanuma saw Mandodari with a beautiful form together with diamonds and pearls, well decorated by 
jewellery and with her self radiance as though decorating that great building with a fair complexion and with 
a radiance like golden colour, who was dear to her husband the lady of women in that gynaeceum sleeping there.

That Hanuma with great arms seeing the woman well decorated, out of logic thought thus: "This is 
Seetha by the wealth of her appearance and her youth". That warrior of Vanaras was delighted together with great 
pleasure.

He clasped his arms, kissed his tail he was delighted, he was playful, sang, paced showing his 
simian nature, climbed pillars and fell down on land.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thereafter ogre women with a cruel nature, with crooked faces neared that Seetha and spoke unpleasant 
words harshly.

"O Seetha! Why are you not agreeing to stay in the gynaeceum pleasing to all beings together with 
very best beds."

"You who are a human are thinking highly about the wifehood of a human being. Withdraw your mind 
from Rama. Otherwise you will not exist at all."

"Sport according to your comfort coming together with the king of ogres Ravana enjoying luxuries 
of the three worlds and taking him as husband.

"O beautiful one! O irrreproachable one! But being a human you are desiring that Rama who is a 
human, banished from kingdom, unsuccessful and gloomy."

Seetha with eyes like lotuses hearing the words of ogre women spoke these words with eyes filled 
with tears.

"All of you coming together whatever words which are hated in the world you spoke in my matter, 
this does it not seem sinful in your mind?"

"Human woman is not waited to become wife of an ogre. All of you freely eat me. I will not honour 
your words."

"Although wretched or without kingdom, whoever is my husband, He alone is my master. Like Suvarchala 
with the Sun God, I am fond of Him always."

"Like the highly fortunate Sachi who waits upon Indra, like Arundhati on Vasishta, like Rohini 
on the Moon God, like Lopamudra on Agastya, like Sukanya on Chyavana, like Savitri on Satyavanta, like Srimati 
on Kapila, like Madayanti on Saudasa, like Kesini on Sagara, like Damayanti the daughter of Bhima, devoted to 
husband Nala, in the same way I am devoted to my husband Rama, the best in Ikshvaku dynasty."

Ogre women incited by Ravana listening to the words of Seetha, swooned with anger and frightened 
Her with harsh words.

That monkey Hanuma not talking and hiding in the Simsupa tree listened to those ogre women frightening 
Seetha.

Nearing that Seetha shaking with fear in all directions, those ogres being angry licked a lot shining 
and hanging lips.

Being angry a lot and grasping axes quickly spoke as follows: "This woman is not suited to have 
the king of ogres Ravana as husband."

Being frightened by ogre women who were horrible that Seetha with best face with tears in eyes 
and moving from there reached that Simsupa tree.

Thereafter the wide eyed Seetha nearing that Simsupa tree being surrounded by ogre women was situated 
there with gloom.

Those ogres frightened from all directions that Seetha who was emaciated with a pitiful face and 
wearing dirty garments.

Thereafter an ogre woman named Vinata with a horrible appearance with an angry form, crooked, having 
a prominent belly spoke to Her.

"O Seetha! You have showed love of husband. This much is enough. O auspicious one! At all times 
doing something excessively serves as vice."

"O Seetha! I am happy. Human duty has been done by you. Let there be fortune to you. Do also according 
to my wholesome words being told."

"Obtain as husband Ravana who is the lord of al l ogres, bold and handsome, like Indra the lord 
of Devas, able one and liberal with a pleasing appearance to all."

"Leaving Rama who is a human and miserable, seek refuge in Ravana. O Seetha! With best unguents 
to the body and decorated with best ornaments, become mistress of all the worlds from today."

"O auspicious one! Like Svaha the wife of the Fire God, like Sachi the wife of Indra become mistress 
of all worlds. O Seetha! What is the use with Rama who is miserable and with gone vigour."

If you do not do my this spoken word, all of us in this moment will eat you.

Another ogre named Vikata with hanging breasts raising fist and roaring with anger spoke to Seetha.

"O Seetha with an evil mind! Your many words which are unpleasant have been tolerated due to pity 
and due to softness."

"O Seetha! You are not doing according to our word which is respected by time and wholesome. You 
have been brought to this bank of the ocean not obtainable by others. You have entered the terrible gynaeceum 
of Ravana."

"Withheld in the house of Ravana well protected by us, even Devendra himself is not capable to 
protect you."

"O Seetha! Do according to my word, which is beneficial. Discharge of tears is enough. Leave worthless 
gloom."

"O Seetha! Have love and happiness. Leave this daily gloom. Sport according to comfort with the 
king of ogres."

"O timid one! You know how youth of women is not lasting. As long as your youth will not pass away, 
so long get comfort."

"O one with intoxicating eyes! You along with king of ogres roam beautiful groves, mountains and 
nearby forests.

"O beautiful one! seven thousand women will be in your control. Have as husband Ravana the lord 
of all ogres."

"O Seetha! If you do not do according to my spoken word as is, I will eat your heart indeed by 
plucking it out."

Thereafter an ogre woman named Chandodari swooning with anger, turning around a big spike spoke 
this word.

"Seeing this woman with eyes like that of a deer, with moving breasts due to fear, abducted by 
Ravana, there occured to me a great desire."

"It is my mind to eat the liver, the spleen, flesh above heart and heart together with muscle and 
entrails and the head."

An ogre woman named Pragasa spoke these words : "Squeeze the neck of this cruel woman. Why do we 
delay?"

"Thereafter let it be known to the king that that human woman has died. He will say thus : "Eat.". 
There is no doubt in this matter."

Thereafter an ogre woman named Ajamukhi spoke these words : "All of you killing this woman thereafter 
do equal pieces."

"Thereafter all of us will divide. Quarrel is not desirable to me. Liquor, many kinds and a lot 
of lickables be brought quickly."

Thereafter an ogre woman named Surpanakha spoke these words: "That which was spoken by Ajamukhi, 
is desirable to me."

"Liquor which is the destroyer of all sorrow be brought quickly. Eating human flesh afterwards, 
we will dance for propitiating Nikumbila."

Thus being frightened by horrible ogres, that Seetha equalling a daughter of gods, abandoning fortitude, 
was crying.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing those words of Seetha who was overthrown from one grief to another, Hanuma the best of 
monkeys gave the following reply in a kindly and affectionate manner.

"O Seetha the daughter of the king of Videha Kingdom! I have come here as your messenger on Rama's 
directions. The virtuous Rama enquired about your welfare too."

"O Divine Lady! Rama the son of Dasaratha, who is excellent among the knowers of Veda and who knows 
Brahma's missile (a mythical weapon which deals infallible destruction) and Vedas the sacred knowledge, enquired 
about your welfare."

"Also the greatly splendourous Lakshmana, the favourite brother and the follower of your husband, 
himself tormented with grief, performed salutation to you by bowing his head."

Hearing that news of welfare of Rama and Lakshmana the excellent of men, the divine lady, with 
all her limbs thrilled with joy, spoke to Hanuma (as follows):

" 'Joy rushes to surviving man even though (it be) as the end of a hundred years' - this popular 
adage appears true and and auspicious for me."

Seetha showed wonderful friendly disposition towards Hanuma who approached her. Both of them also 
conversed with each other in full confidence.

Hearing that reply of Seetha who was afflicted with grief, Hanuma the army-chief of monkeys endeavoured 
to draw nearer to her.

In as much as that Hanuma drew nearer to her, in the same way, that Seetha suspected him as Ravana.

"O shame! It was my guilt to tell him all this to him. He is indeed that Ravana, who obtained another 
guise."

That Seetha, having faultless limbs, leaving that branch of Ashoka tree and as emaciated with grief, 
sat down on that ground itself.

Seeing Seetha afflicted with grief and deluded with fear, the great armed Hanuma also then simply 
saluted her. She too, trembling with fear, did not look towards him again.

Seetha, with her countenance resembling the moon, seeing Hanuma saluting her, had a deep sigh and 
spoke to Hanuma in a sweet-sounding voice (as follows)

"If you are Ravana, who made use of an illusive guise and yourself a conjurer, you are causing 
me a further agony. It is no good."

'You are indeed the same Ravana, who, abandoning your real form, appeared to me in the guise of 
a vagrant religious mendicant in Janasthana."

"O demon who can assume any form at your will! It is no good that again you are causing agony to 
me, emaciated because of fasting and feeling very miserable."

"Otherwise, whatever is suspected by me is not indeed true because in my mind, a pleasurable sensation 
indeed occurred by reason of your audience."

"If you have come as Rama's messenger, may you be blessed! O the best of monkeys! Rama's anecdote 
is very pleasurable for me. Hence, I am requesting you to narrate it."

"O monkey! Narrate the qualities of my beloved Rama. O gentle one! You are eroding my mind as a 
rapid course of stream erodes a river bank."

"I, who was taken away long ago, is seeing a monkey sent by Rama in this way. Alas! How delightful 
this dream is!'

"If I have seen the eminent Rama together with Lakshmana, I would not have disheartened. In my 
case, even my dream is wicked!"

"I do not deem it as a dream. Seeing a monkey in a dream does not bring about prosperity But prosperity 
has come to me!"

"How possibly is it a delusion of my mind? Is it an impending course of flatulence or changing 
mental condition of madness? Is it a looming mirage?"

"Otherwise, it is neither madness nor even a delusion, which is a symptom of madness. Because I 
am knowing about myself as also about this monkey."

Thus deliberating upon the strengths and weaknesses in several ways, Seetha finally imagined him 
to be Ravana, as demons can change their forms at will.

Then, that slender waisted Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, thus having made up her mind, did not 
reply in return anything further to Hanuman.

Understanding the contemplation of Seetha, Hanuma the son of wind-god then brought about a great 
joy in her with his words most favourable to her ears (as follows):

"Rama has a great splendour like that of the sun. He is pleasing to all like the moon. As Kubera 
the Lord of wealth, he is a lord to the entire world. Like Vishnu, he is greatly renowned and endowed with valour."

"Rama is a speaker of truth. Like Lord Brihaspati, he has a sweet voice. He is a handsome man, 
possessing good fortune and a royal dignity. He is a personified Manmadha, the lord of love."

"Rama gets anger only at right time. He strikes a befitting person at a right time. He is an excellent 
chariot-warrior. The world is resting under the shelter of arms of this high souled man."

"Showing an illusory antelope, Ravana detracted Rama and took you away from a deserted hermitage. 
You will see later, the consequence Ravana will get for this act."

"Which valiant Rama with arrows strongly shining like sparkles released with anger, by the same 
Rama I was sent here as a messenger and I arrived at your presence. That Rama, agonised by your separation wishes 
to enquire of your welfare."

"That long-armed Lakshmana too, having a great splendour and who augments the happiness of Sumitra 
his mother, saluted you and enquired about your welfare."

"O princess! That monkey called Sugreeva, a companion of Rama and the king of the excellent monkeys, 
asked about your welfare."

"Rama, together with Sugreeva and Lakshmana, is always recollecting you. O Seetha! Eventhough coming 
into the control female-demons, you are somehow surviving by your good luck!"

"Within a few days, you will see Rama, the mighty Lakshmana and the highly splendorous Sugreeva, 
in the presence of crores of monkeys."

"I am a monkey, the minister of Sugreeva, called Hanuma. I entered the city of Lanka, by traversing 
the great ocean."

"Asserting my strength and putting down my feet on the head of the evil minded Ravana, I have come 
to see you."

"O Princess! I am not so, as you comprehend me (as Ravana). Let your suspicion be given up. Believe 
me as I say it."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Ravana conveyed in significant words to that Seetha who was surrounded by ogresses, wretched, without 
happiness and pitiable.

"You are with thighs like the trunk of an elephant. Seeing me covering your breasts and belly, 
you desire obtaining disappearance of self due to fear.

"O wide eyed one! You are endowed with bodily excellencies, pleasing to all people. I desire you. 
O lovable one! respect me."

"O Seetha! Here there are no humans or ogres with ability to change form. Let your fear caused 
due to me be removed."

"O one with fear! Obtaining women belonging to others or abducting by force is the righteous deed 
for ogres by all means. There is no doubt in this."

"O Seetha! It is like this. desire very much may behave in whatever way it likes in my body. But 
I will not touch you without lust."

"O queen of my heart! In this matter fear is not to be made. O love! Believe in me. Truly become 
with love. Do not become absorbed in sorrow like this."

"Single plait, the bed of ground,mediation,dirty cloth,fasting at an inappropriate time - all these 
are not useful to you."

"O Seetha! After getting me gain wonderful garlands, sandals, Agallochums, a variety of cloths 
and best ornaments, the best drinks, beds and seats, song and dance and musical instrument."

"You are a gem among women. Do not be like this. Make decoration on your limbs. O one with a good 
body! Getting me how will you become unsuited for luxuries?"

"This your youth born beautifully is passing away, whichever youth is quickly passing away will 
not come back again like the flow of water."

"O one with auspicious appearance! The creator of form, that creator of the world, Lord Brahma 
has made you and stopped - I think thus. There is not another who is equal to your appearance."

"O Seetha! Obtaining you endowed with beauty and youth, which man even if he is Lord Brahma himself 
will disregard (leave) you."

"O one with face like that of moon! O one with broad hips! Your whichever limb I see, my eye is 
getting tied in that that limb."

"O Seetha! Become my wife. Leave this ignorance. In all my many best women brought from here and 
there, become foremost consort. Let there be auspicious to you."

"O timid one! Whatever gems that have been brought by force, all those, my this kingdom and also 
myself belong to you."

"O charmful lady! Conquering the entire earth together with chain of various cities for your sake, 
I can give to king Janaka.

"In this world I do not see another one who is equally matched to me. See my very great power."

"Suras and Asuras defeated with broken flags by me in war many times are powerless to stand in 
an army against me."

"Desire me! Now let your best decoration be made. On your body let ornaments also with great brilliance 
be fit. I will see well your form together with decoration."

"O one with best face! O timid one! With consideration enjoy luxuries according to your desire 
together with decoration. Drink. Rejoice."

"You donate land and wealth according to your wish. With confidence behave freely in my matter. 
Fearlessly order also."

" By my grace with your sporting, tour relatives will also sport. O auspicious one! You see my 
wealth and my fame."

"O beautiful one! What can you do with Rama clad in tatters, with lost hope of victory, with gone 
fortune. Roaming in forests, observing austerities and also sleeping on floor, I doubt if Rama is alive or not."

"O Seetha, Rama indeed does not get opportunity even to see you like moonlight covered by dark 
clous with cranes at the front."

"Like Keerthi got by Hiranyakasipu from Indra's hand, Rama is not suited to get you from my hands."

"O one with a beautiful smile! O one with beautiful teeth!O one with beautiful eyes! O charmful 
one! O timid one! You are stealing my heart like a serpent stolen by Garuda.

"You are Wearing a silk cloth in a bad condition. You are emaciated. Even though you have not decorated, 
seeing you I am not getting happiness in my wives."

"O Seetha! whoever women living in gynaeceum endowed with all virtues, have sovereignty on all 
of them."

"O one with black hair! My those women and apsarasas who are the best among the three worlds will 
serve you like the goddess of wealth."

"O one with beautiful hips! O one with beuatiful eyebrows! Enjoy according to your comfort whatever 
gems and wealth belonging to Kubera, all those three worlds and me."

"O Seetha! Rama is not equal to me by austerity, not equal by might; not equal by strength, not 
equal by wealth, by brilliance and by fame."

"O playful one! I will give hordes of wealth and land. You drink. Roam freely and play. Enjoy luxuries. 
Sport according to comfort in me. Your relatives may sport together in you."

"O timid one! With body decorated with gold colored, pure garlands, roam with me in forests born 
at sea shore filled with groups of flowered trees and with humble bees."

undefined

undefined

undefined


That Hanuma who could assume any desire form, searching among houses had a lot of
grief. Endowed with great speed, He roamed again the city of Lanka.


After that, the glorious Hanuma neared the house of Ravana shining with the golden
hue of Sun, surrounded by a compound wall.


Hanuma shined purveying the building protected by horrible rakshasas, like a forest
by lions.


Ravana's house consisted of surprising archways decorated with sliver and gold,
strange entrances and beautiful doors.


Ravana's house waited upon by men on elephants, warriors, people with removed
tiredness, drivers of elephants, by undefeatable horses, and by charioteers.


Hanuma saw Ravana's house with protective shields made of lion and tiger skins,
decorated with ivory, gold and silver, being roamed always by strange chariots with great
sound.


Hanuma saw Ravana's house filled with a lot of diamonds, having valuable seats and
utensils, abode of great warriors, with great chariots and great utensils.


Filled all around with those and those various kinds of animals and birds in
thousands, lovely to watch - very beautiful ones.


Well protected by well trained rakshasas, protecting the inner area, filled all over
by best women who were important.


Having happy women, the abode of Ravana with the tinkling of best jewellery had a
sound like that of an ocean.


Together with royal insignia, with best scents and sandal wood, spread with great
number of people like a great forest with lions.


Resounded by bheris and mridagas, resounded by the sound of conch-shells, prayed
upon daily by Rakshsas, with rituals on festivals, always worshipped by rakshasas.


The great Hanuma saw the wealthy Ravana's huge house, inscrutable like an ocean,
like a noiseless ocean, with a roof embedded with great diamondsand filled with great diamonds.


That great Hanuma thought the house, which was shining with its form filled with
elephants, horses, chariots, to be the jewel of Lanka. Hanuma walked about there in the near-hood
of Ravana.


That Hanuma moved about from one house to another of Rakshasas and also parks and
observing in all directions without fear and also courtyards.


Hanuma with great prowess, and one with great speed, jumped for the house of
Prahasta and from there leapt for another house that of Mahaparshva.


Thereafter the great Hanuma leapt for the house of Kumbhakarna which resembled a
cloud and in the same way for the house of Vibhishana.


That great Hanuma in the same way leapt for the house of Mahodara and also that of
Virupaaksha, that of Viddutjihva.


Hanuma the commander of Vanara army with great radiance went for the intellectual
Suka's house, for Sarana's house, and in the same way for the house of Indrajit.


The best among Vanaras Hanuma went for the house of Jambumali and for the house of
Sumali. The great Hanuma jumped for the house Rasmiketu and in the same way for the house of
Suryaketu and in that way for the building of Vajrakaaya.


Hanuma jumped for Dhumrah's house, for Sampati's house, for Vidhudrupa's, Bhiima's
house, for Ghana's house and Vighana's house, for Sukhana's house, for Vakra's, for Satha's house
and also for Vikata's house, for Brahmakarna's house, for Damshra's house, for Roma's house, for
Raksha's house, for Ydhonmata's and Indrajihva's house, in the same way for Hastimukas house, for
Karala's house, for Pisacha's house, and also for the building of Shonita.


The son of Vayu, one with great fame, great one among Vanaras , moving about in a
sequence in those and those best buildings, saw the wealth of those rakshasas, who were rich.


The glorious Hanuma passing everyone's houses all round, there-after neared the
house of Ravana.


Hanuma best among Vanaras, tiger among Vanaras, moving about saw Rakshas women,
those who were sleeping near to Ravana, those who had horrific eyes, those who had Sulaas, Mudgaras
in their hands, those who had Shaktis and Tomaras.


Hanuma saw in that house of Ravana a variety of army divisions and also Rakshasas
those who had huge bodies having different weapons raise up.


That Hanuma in that house saw horses in red colour and in white colour, slightly
whitish, capable of great speed, elephants born in a good breed having good appearance capable of
harassing enemy's elephants, skilled in good elephant training, equalling Iraavata, capable of
killing enemies armies in war, rutting like raining clouds, like mountains with water falls that
are pouring down, with trumpeting resembling thundering of clouds, unassailable by enemies in a
battle.


There Hanuma saw in the house of Ravana, the king of rakshasas, army divisions in
thousands decorated with gold, covered with heaps of gold, equalling the Sun who has fully come
up.


That Hanuma the son of Vayu saw in the house of Ravana the king of rakshasas,
palanquins of various shapes, wonderful bowers, art galleries and other pleasure houses which were
constructed with wooden mountains, house for sexual delight and a beautiful diurnal house.


That Hanuma saw the best among buildings equalling mount Mandara filled with pens
for peacocks, spread by flag staffs managed by courageous ones like the house of Kubera filled with
many diamonds and also heaps of riches.


That building shone by the rays of diamonds, by the splendour of Ravana like the Sun
by rays.


Hanuma leader of Vanaras saw couches and seats and chief vessels all made with
gold.


Hanuma entered the big house moistened by liquor made of honey, filled with vessels
made of gems delightful one, un-congested one like the building of Kubera resounded by the sound of
tinkles by the sound of waist ornaments, by the sound of percussion on Mrudangas with deep sound,
which consisted of many mansions filled with hundreds of best women, encircled by many spacious
enclosures.


Thus, this is the 6th chapter in Sundara Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana, the First Epic
poem of India.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing those words, which were aprropriate for that place and time, spoken by that hih-souled 
Vibhishana, his brother, Ravana spoke the following words in reply:

"You have spoken well indeed that killing of an envoy is forbidden. Another punishment 
other than killing needs be certainly meted out to him."

"It is said that a tail is possibly a beloved ornament for the monkeys. Let his tail 
be burn immediately. Let him go with a burnt tail."

"Let all his relatives together with his friends, kinsmen and amicable persons then see 
him miserably injured with his deformed limbs."

Ravana ordered that let the monkey be carried around with his burning tail by the demons 
in the entire city around its cross-roads."

Hearing those words of Ravana, the demons, hard-tempered with their wrath, wrapped, up 
old ragged clothes around Hanuma's tail.

While his tail was being wrapped around with cotton tatters, Hanuma proliferating, soon 
after catching dry wood in forests.

The demons sprinkled oil and set out fire on that tail. Then, Hanuma, with his face resembling 
a rising sun with his mind filled with anger and impatience and with his burning tail, threw those demons 
down.

To see the burning tail of that Hanuma, the delighted demons together with their women, 
chldren and elders went there.

Tied down again by the cruel demons, coming together, the heroic Hanuma the foremost 
among monkeys made up his mind appropriate for that occasion (as follows):

"Though I have been tied down, those demons cannot do whatever they wish to do against 
me. Breaking the ties, I can fly up and kill them."

"If these evil-minded demons fasten me who is acting for the good of Rama my lord, because 
of the command by their lord, no rebuff has been done to me."

"I am adequate enough to kill all these demons in battle. But, for the delight of Rama, 
such city of Lanka is fit to be espionaged again. For this reason, I am putting up with it."

"Lanka was not indeed observed well as to the particulars of specifications of the fort, 
when it was seen by me during the night. Surely, it is to be seen by me during the day-time."

"Let the demons tie me down of again and torment me as they wish, by burning my tail. 
There will be no travail to my mind."

Then, those delighted demons went, seizing Hanuma, who concealed all types of his feelings, 
who was strong and foremost among monkeys.

Sounding couches and kettle-drums and proclaining the acts of Hanuma like his damaging 
of the pleasure-garden, the demons performing terrible deeds, dragged Hanuma through out that city.

Accompanied by demons, Hanuma the annihilator of enemies, went happily and roamed about 
in that great city of demons.

Then, Hanuma saw some wonderful house some wrapped up plots of land and well parted cross 
ways.

Hanuma, the son of wind-god, saw streets congested with dwellings, places where several 
roads meet, high-ways as also approach-roads, small inner apartments and palaces appearing in multitudes, 
like clouds.

All the demons proclaimed in cross roads, four-pillared temples and in royal high-ways, 
saying that Hanuma was a spy.

Women, children and old people came out from their respective dwellings, with an eagerness 
to see that Hanuma with his burning tail.

While the tip of Hanuma's tail was being ignited by the demons there, those female-demons 
with monstrous eyes then informed that unpleasant matter to Seetha, the princess.

"O Seetha! That monkey with a red face, who had a conversation with you, is being moved 
around in the city, with his ignited tail."

Hearing that cruel news, which created as much sorrow as when she was carried away by 
Ravana, Seetha was tormented with grief and started to pay homage to the fire-god.

Then, the large-eyed Seetha, wishing for the welfare of Hanuma, prayed the fire-god with 
her devoted self.

"If I have done any service to my husband, if I have performed a penance and if I am 
a faithful wife, please be cool to Hanuma."

"If the wise Rama has even a little of kindness to me and if I have still some good fortune 
remaining to my credit, please be cool to Hanuma."

"If that virtuous Rama recognises me as one,, who is endowed with a good moral conduct 
and who is ardently desirous of meeting him, please be cool to Hanuma."

"If the venerable Sugreeva, true to his promise, can make me traverse from this ocean 
of sorrow, please be cool to Hanuma."

Then, the fire-god, as though informing the fawn-eyed Seetha about the well-being of 
Hanuma, shone brightly with sharp flames, undisteurbed and shooting out pointed flames towards the right.

Even wind-god, the father of Hanuma, combined with the fire on Hanuma's tail, swept coolly 
like a snow-breeze, creating a solace to Seetha.

While his tail was in flames, Hanuma was reflecting why the fire, which was blazing on 
all sides, was not burning him.

"It is conspicuous with large flames. But it is not creating any paoin to me, as if a 
snow-ball is kept at the tip of my tail."

"Or, while I was jumping over the ocean, a surprise-alliance was formed with Mount Mainaka 
and through the mountain, with the ocean, because of Rama's power. By this, the reason of the coolness 
is clear."

"If such an eagerness was there in the mind of the sea and the wise Mount Mainaka for 
the cause of Rama; will not the fire-god show the same degree of eagerness in making its touch cold?"

"The fire does not burn me, due to kindness of Seetha, powerfulness of Rama and friendlines 
of my father."

That Hanuma, the foremost among the monkeys, reflected agian for a monment, jumped with 
swiftness and roared too.

Then, the glorious Hanuma like a mountain-peak, approached the city-gate, which was looking 
high and stood secluded from the crowds of demons.

That prudent Hanuma assumed the form of a mountain and immediately within a moment, assumed 
an exceedingly short form, thus becoming free from his tethers.

The glorious Hanuma, having been free from his bonds, again assumed the form equal to 
a mountain and while looking around, found and iron rod belonging to the arched door-way.

That long-armed Hanuma, again taking taht rod made of iron, killed all those guards.

That Hanuma, having an impetuous valour in combat, destroying those demons and looking 
over Lanka, shone like the sun encircled with rays, with the wreath of flames blazing on his tail.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Keeping Angada the prince in their forefront those monkeys, on reaching Mount Prasravana 
having forests of variegated appearance, offered their salutation by bowing their heads in reverence 
to Rama and the mighty Lakshmana, greeting Sugreeva respectfully. Then, they started narrating the news 
of Seetha.

Those monkeys started to narrate, in the presence of Rama, about, the female-demons, 
and frightening Seetha in Ravana's gynaecium, her complete affection towards Rama and the time-limit 
of two months given by Ravana.

Hearing of Seetha being alive, Rama on his part replied, "Where is Seetha, the princess? 
How is she disposed towards me? O monkeys! Tell me all that about Seetha."

Hearing the words of Rama, the monkeys urged Hanuma to tell, in the presence of Rama, 
all the incidents because he knew them better, about Seetha.

Hearing the words of those monkeys, the eloquent Hanuma, the son of wind-god saluting 
towards the direction of the Seetha the princess by bowing his head, spoke the following words, explaining 
how he saw Seetha.

"Having gone across the ocean, a hundred Yojanas wide, I reached the southern shore looking 
in search of Seetha, Janaka's daughter, with a wish to see her."

"There at the southern shore of the southern ocean, there is city called Lanka of the 
evil-minded Ravana."

"O Rama! There, living in Ravana's gynaecium in the city, I saw the lady Seetha, your 
virtuous wife, centering her heart's desire in you."

"In that pleasure garden, I saw Seetha sitting in the midst of female demons, guarded 
by those ugly-faced female-demons as also time and again being threatened by them."

"O hero! Seetha, who deserves to live happily with you, is obtaining grief. O Rama! I 
somehow searched that princess, Seetha wearing a single plait (as a as a mark of desolation), looking 
miserable, remaining absorbed in your thought, reposing on the floor, having discoloured limbs like 
a lotus in winter, turning back the wish from Ravana, having determined to die, but thinking of you 
alone."

"O faultless tiger among men! Seetha established confidence in me, after I slowly described 
to her the fame of Ikshvaku dynasty."

"Thereafter, I spoke and explained to Seetha, about the entire significance of my arrival 
there. On hearing about the alliance between Rama and Sugreeva, she was quite pleased. Her morality 
as well as her devotion in you are steadfast."

"O, the foremost of men! I thus saw that illustrious Seetha, endowed with severe penance 
and devotion towards you."

"O Rama, of great intelligence! To me, she gave as a token of remembrance, a previous 
event of a crow occurred at your vicinity in Mount Chitrakuta."

"Seetha spoke to me saying, 'O Hanuma! Inform Rama, the foremost among men, all that 
you have seen here."

"While Sugreeva is hearing nearby and while you are telling the words in this way, let 
this jewel, which is deliberately well-guarded, be given to Rama."

"This beautiful jewel for the head has been well-guarded by me. You also ought to recall 
a mark indeed painted by you (by slip) on the curve of my cheek with powder of an orange-red rock, when 
my former mark on my forehead got effaced."

"This beautiful jewel, which has its origin in sea-water, has been sent to you. Seeing 
this in my grief, I am feeling always happy as though I am seeing you."

"O Rama! I shall be sustaining my life for a month. Having come into the control of demons, 
I cannot survive beyond one month."

"Seetha, with her emaciated body, practicing virtue, confined in Ravana's gynaecium and 
with her wide-open eyes like that of a doe, spoke to me the following words:

"O Rama! I have narrated to you whatever has occurred, in its entirety. Let a bridge 
be constructed, by all means, across the waters of the ocean."

Coming to know that the two princes, Rama and Lakshmana have become confident and having 
given that token of remembrance to Rama, Hanuma apprised completely in so many words, in regular succession, 
all that was conveyed by Seetha, the princess.

undefined

undefined

undefined

That Hanuma interested in sight of Seetha, in the middle of that building, went towards houses 
made of plant creepers, art houses, and nocturnal houses but did not see Her with a beautiful appearance.

That great Hanuma then later not seeing that Seetha dear to Rama thought thus: "to me searching 
Seetha in whatever way appearance not being obtained, from that Seetha definitely has died."

"That Seetha standing in the best traditional path being chaste interested, in preserving her character 
must have been killed by the king of these Rakshasas who performed evil deeds - this is certain."

"That daughter of King Janaka died of fear seeing the wives of Ravana with crooked appearances 
- horrible ones without radiance with great faces with long and crooked eyes."

"Without seeing Seetha, not obtaining destiny and wandering for a long time together with Vanaras, 
to me there is not a path to go near Sugreeva. Sugreeva has a sharp punishment and also is strong."

"All inner city has been seen. Women of Ravana have been seen. The chaste Seetha has not been seen. 
My effort became wastefull."

"To me who has gone back all Vanaras after meeting what they would say? O strong one! Going there, 
what has been done by you? Tell that to us."

"Without seeing that Seetha what can I say? Due to passing of time, definitely they will obtain 
fire."

"To me who had gone for the other shore of the ocean what will the old Jambavan say? What would 
that Angada and vanaras who meet say?"

"Non-depression is root of development. Absence of despondency is the greatest comfort. Self reliance 
always is indeed the promoter in all matters."

"Whatever action a human does that action of man is made to be successful by non-depression. For 
that reason I will perform a best effort together with non-depression. I will search all those regions ruled by 
Ravana not yet seen."

"Bars have been searched; in the same way flower houses, art houses have been searched; again pleasure 
houses, pathways in the middle of gardens, buildings in all directions have been searched."

Thus thinking Hanuma began to search again undergrounds, houses at the beginning of street intersections 
and also small houses faraway from the main houses.

The great Hanuma flying again and again and jumping down, standing up, walking, opening doors, 
pushing doors and entering inside, coming out, climbing down, climbing up wandered all opportunity.

That Hanuma in that city of Ravana - whatever region he did not go that region was not there even 
for four angulas.

Streets between fort walls, platforms together with the intersection of four streets, wells, lakes 
all these had been seen by him.

Rakshasa women of various forms, with crooked forms and horrific forms had been seen there by Hanuma 
but not that Seetha.

The best Vidhyadhara women incomparable by beauty in the world had been seen there by Hanuma, but 
not Seetha.

Naaga women with beautiful buttocks, with faces equaling full moon had been seen by Hanuma there, 
but not Seetha with a beautiful waist.

Naaga women who had been stolen forcefully, being defeated by Ravana had been seen there by Hanuma, 
not that Seetha

That Hanuma with great arms, the wise one, the son of Vayu not seeing that Seetha and seeing other 
women became depressed again and again.

Seeing the effort of the best Vanaras and the crossing of ocean as being wasted, Hanuma got depression 
again.

Thereafter the son of Vayu Hanuma got down from Pushpaka, obtained thought with a mind overcome 
with grief.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thereafter, those seven sons of his chief minister having a lustre similar to that of 
fire, surrounded by a great army, wielding their respective bows, possessing a great strength, well-trained 
in archery and the best among knower of weapons, wishing a victory reciprocally, having an immense prowess 
each, and as directed by Ravana, started highly delighted from that palace, in great chariots yoked 
with horses. Those chariots were having a noise similar to that of an autumnal cloud, overlaid with 
a protective armour of gold, surmounted by banners and decorated with smaller flags. They were stretching 
their bows inlaid with refined gold and looking colourful like clouds accompanied by flashes of lightning.

Coming to know that Kimkaras themselves were killed their mothers together with their 
relatives and friends were tormented with grief.

Those sons of chief minister, wearing ornaments made of pure gold, rushed towards Hanuma, 
who was ready for battle and who stood on the archy gate-way motionless.

Those demons looking like clouds, diffusing thunder-like sounds of their chariots and 
discharging a shower of arrows, moved in different directions resembling rainy clouds in the monsoon.

Thus covered by those showers of arrows, Hanuma became invisible even as a mountain-king 
is concealed by incessant showers.

Roaming about in a cloudless sky, that fast-footed monkey made the arrows and the speedy 
chariots of those virile demons, useless.

Playing with those demons wielding a bow each in the sky, that hero shone like the Lord 
of Wind, playing with clouds brandishing a rain bow.

Making a terrific roar and frightening that great army, the valiant Hanuma rushed on 
those demons.

That Hanuma, the annihilator of enemies, struck some with his palms, some with his feet 
and some others with his fists. He tore down some others with his nails.

Hanuma crushed some with his chest and some others with his thighs. Some fell down there 
itself on the ground, just by the roar made by Hanuma.

Seeing those demons dying and falling on the ground, all the remaining army, afflicted 
with fear, fled in ten different directions.

Their elephants trumpeted with a wrong accent. Horses fell down on the ground. Even the 
earth was filled with chariots which had their seats, banners and canopies broken.

Thereafter, streams flowing with blood were seen on the way. Lanka resounded with various 
kinds of horrible voices.

That heroic and mighty Hanuma having a terrible prowess, killing those arrogant demons 
and being desirous of a combat with the other demons, again reached that archy door way itself.

undefined

undefined

undefined

After killing the Kinkaras, that Hanuma thought to himself (as follows): "The grove was 
damaged by me. The lofty palatial mansion of the sanctuary (sacred to the guardian-deity of the demons) 
has not been destroyed. For that reason, I will cause this mansion to crumble down in the same way." 
Thus thinking himself, Hanuma the best among monkeys, son of the wind-god having large jaws, by showing 
his strength, bounced up and ascended the lofty palatial mansion of the sanctuary, which was as high 
as a mountain-top of Meru.

That Hanuma, an army-chief of monkeys, possessing a very great splendour, ascending the 
lofty palatial mansion similar to a mountain shone like a second rising sun.

Overpowering the lofty and inviolable of the sanctuary, Hanuma blazing mansion his splendour, 
meta morposed into a towering sized body equal to that of Pariyatra mountain.

Enhancing his body to a very big size by dint of his distinction, Hanuma clapped on his 
arms strongly, filling the City of Lanka with sound.

By the great deafening noise, made by clapping on his arms, the birds and also the guards 
protecting the sanctuary unconsciously fell down.

"Long live Rama, skilled in archery and the powerful Lakshmana! Long lie the King Sugreeva, 
protected by Rama! I am Hanuma, the destroyer of the army of adversaries and the son of wind-god. I 
am the servent of Rama, the king of Kosala kingdom, who is unwearied in action. Even a thousand of Ravanas 
will not be matching equally with me, who is capable of striking with thousnads of rocks and trees in 
battle. Here, before the eyes of all the demons, I will annihilate the City of Lanka and after offering 
salutation to Seetha, I will go back duly completing my task."

Thus uttering to those guards protecting the sanctuary, roared terribly, making a noise 
and creating a terror to the demons.

Hearing that loud noise, hundreds of guards protecting the sanctuary went, taking many 
kinds of weapons, spears, swords and axes. Those Kinkaras with huge bodies surrounded Hanuma, duly discharging 
those weapons.

They banged Hanuma with various kinds of maces, iron bludgeons plated with gold and arrows 
shining like the sun. That troop of demons surrounding Hanuma the best among monkeys, shone like a greatly 
extensive whirlpool in the waters of River Ganga.

Thereupon, the enraged Hanuma assumed a terrific form. Hanuma possessing a gigantic body 
and the son of wind-god, uprooting a pillar with a hundred edges and decorated with gold in that edifice, 
then speedily whirled it around.

Fire was also generated there (due to friction with other pillars) The edifice was then 
consumed by fire. Seeing the edifice burning, that Hanuma killing those hundred demons, like Indra killing 
demons with his thunderbolt and gloriously staying in the sky, spoke (the following) words:

"Thousands of monkeys like me, possessing gigantic bodies of strength, were sent on the 
orders of Sugreeva. We and other monkeys are now roaming the entire earth."

"Some of the monkeys are having a strength of ten elephants. Some are having a strength 
of a hundred elephants. Some are having a prowess equal to that of a thousand elephants."

"Some are having the strength of a strong stream. Some have strength equal to that of 
wind. Some other army-chiefs of monkeys even cannot be measured."

"Surrounded by hundreds, myriads, lakhs and crores of such monkeys having their teeth 
and nails as their weapons, Sugreeva, who is capable of destroying you all, will come."

"You hold enmity with the high souled Rama. For this, the City of Lanka will not be there. 
Neither you, nor even Ravana will survive."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thereafter at that time Seetha a princess without any blame of excellent limbs shook like a plantain 
tree in wind on seeing Ravana the king of rakshasas endowed with beauty and youth adorned with excellent ornaments.

The wide eyed Seetha with excellent color covering stomach with thighs and breasts with hands sat 
down crying.

Ravana saw Seetha protected by batches of ogres looking miserable being struck with grief like 
a ship in danger in the sea.

Hanuma saw Seetha sitting down on uncovered land, with a firm resolve, like a branch of a tree 
fallen down on earth being torn from the tree.

Hanuma saw Seetha with a stange body with dirt as ornament, who although suited to decorate with 
ornaments was without ornaments. Although She was shining like a lotus stem covered with mud, She was not shining 
also.

Seetha was as though going near to Rama a lion among kings with a famous personality with desires 
as chariot tied with thoughts as horses.

Seetha a pleasant one, was emaciated, was crying, being alone having surrendered to Her thoughts 
and sorrow not seeing the end of grief, following the will of Rama.

And also Seetha was like a great she-serpant writhing under the spell of an incantation. She was 
like Rohini being fumigated by a smoke colored planet called Ketu.

Being born in a virtuous traditional family with good conduct and character and getting married, 
Seetha appeared as if She was born in a bad family.

Seetha was like fame fallen down due to false blame. She was like education ruined due to lack 
of learning by heart.

Seetha was like deteriorated great fame,like insulted faith,like an understanding grown feeble, 
like dulled hope.

Seetha was like an expectation destroyed, like an order flouted; like a blazing quarter during 
a period of destruction, like a worship stolen.

Seetha was like a lotus destroyed, like an army with killed warriors, like light destroyed by darkness, 
like vanished river.

Seetha was like an altar desecrated, like a tongue of fire gone out, like a full moon night with 
moon devoured by Rahu.

Seetha was like a lotus pond agitated with torned out leaves and lotuses, being roughly traeated 
by the trunk of an elephant.

Grieved for husband, Seetha was like a river which has dried uo with water caused to flow out lacking 
best washing, was like a new moon night.

Seetha was a delicate one with well built limbs, accustomed to houses full of diamonds, being tormented 
by heat, like a lotus fibre uprooted short time back.

Seetha was like a she-elephant captured and tied to a pillar, made to be without the leader of 
herd, sighing, very much tormented by grief.

With a long single plait, shining without effort, Seetha was like the earth with dark groups of 
trees at the end of rainy season.

Wasted, emaciated due to fasting, due to sorrow, due to thought and due to fear, Seetha was with 
limited food and with austerity as wealth.

Seetha was like a celestial being, tormented by grief and by thought with joined palms, desiring 
the defeat of Ravana at the hands of Sri Rama

Ravana was trying to allure and threatening death to Seetha who was looking at every direction, 
crying, without blame, with good eye lids and reddish and white eyes, with an excessive vow to follow Sri Rama.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Then, seeing Hanuma, who was tawny coloured like a series of flashing thunderbolts wrapped up in 
a white cloth and hiding behind the branches of a tree, Seetha had her mind shaken.

Seetha beheld there a monkey, beaming like a cluster of Ashoka flowers wide opened, with his eyes 
resembling regined gold, humble and speaking agreeable words.

Seetha got a great surprise and thought (as follows): "Alas! This monkey is hard to be approached, 
fearful and difficult to be looked at." Thus thinking, she was bewildered again.

The splendid woman Seetha, bewildered by fear and afflicted with grief, lamented most piteously 
saying "O, Rama! O, Rama! and "O Lakshmana!". Seetha wept faintly in a low voice in many ways.

Seeing that excellent monkey appraching humbly, that splendid woman Seetha thought it as a dream.

Seetha, looking hither and thither, saw Hanuman, who was having a wide and curved mouth, doing 
acts as told by sugreeva the king of monkeys, the foremost of monkeys, greatly adored and the best among the inelligent.

As soon as seeing Hanuma Seetha lost her consciousness very much and became seemingly lifeless. 
Regaining her consciousness after a long time the wide eyed Seetha moreover thought (as follows)

"Today, I saw an ugly monkey in my dream, which is forbidden according to a body of scriptures. 
May it be well with Rama together with Lakshmana and with my father, King Janaka.

"This is not a dream. To me, tormented by sorrow and grief, there is indeed no sleep. To me, separated 
from Rama whose countenance resembles a full moon, there is no happiness indeed!"

"Since I am pondering with my mind about that Rama only, and always saying 'Rama! Rama!' thus, 
confomably I am seeing and hearing a story thus corresponding to he same thought."

"Tormented as I am today by manmatha god of love longing for Rama, my whole feelings directed towards 
him and constantly thinking of him alone, in the like manner I am seeing him and in the like manner i am hearing 
of him alone."

"I am imagining that my wish will be fulfilled. Likewise, I am reasoning my wish by my intellect 
also. There is no concrete form indeed for my wish. He, with a well manifested form is speaking to me. for what 
reason?"

"My salutation to Brihaspati the Lord of eloquence, together with Indra the wielder of a thunderbolt, 
to Brahma the self-existent Lord and to the Lord of Fire eating the oblations! Let whatever words spoken by this 
monkey be true! Let them not be untrue!"

undefined

undefined

undefined

The king Ravana who makes enemies to cry thus speaking to Seetha thereafter also ordering all ogre 
women went away.

After Ravana left and obtained gynaeceum, those ogres with horrible appearances went running to 
Seetha.

Thereafter reaching Seetha ogre women swooned with anger and with a very harsh speech spoke these 
words to Seetha.

"O Seetha! You are not respscting becoming wife of Ravana born in the family of Paulastya, best 
among men, a great soul with ten heads."

Thereafter an ogre woman named Ekajata with red eyes sue to anger calling Seetha with stomach that 
can be held by palm of the hand, spoke these words.

"Among th six Prajapatis, whichever son, the fourth Prajapati, born by the thought of Lord Brahma 
,he is famous as Paulastya."

By the name, famous as Visrava, with a radiance equalling that of Lord Brahmathat glorious sage 
is the son born from the thought of Pulastya.

"O wide eyed one! Ravana who makes enemies to cry, is Visrava's son. You are suited to become Ravana's 
wife. O one with all beautiful limbs! Why will you not agree words spoken by me."

Thereafter an ogre woman named Harijata with eyes like those of a cat turned around eyes due to 
anger and spoke these words.

"By whom thirty three Devas and the king of Devas have been conquered, you are suited to become 
the wife of that lord of ogres.

Thereafter an ogre named Praghasa swooning with anger and then frightening Seetha, spoke this horrible 
word.

"Why will you not get wifehood of Ravana who is proud of his might, valiant, who will not turn 
back in wars, who is strong together with valour."

"The mighty Ravana can leave dear respectable wife who among all wives is most fortunate and can 
obtain you."

"Ravana leaving gynaeceum filled with thousand women and shone by various best things can obtain 
you.

Another ogre woman named Vikata spoke these words: "By whom a number of times in war Devas, in 
war Nagas, Gandharvas and Danavas have been conquered that Ravana has come to your side."

"O vile one! Why are you not desiring wifehood of such Ravana, fulfilled in all respects, who is 
a great soul and lord of ogres.

Thereafter an ogre woman named Durmukhi spoke these words: " O one with long eyes! Fearing whom 
the sun will not comsume by heat, fearing whom the win will not blow, to that one why are you not favourable."

"O one with good eyebrows! O Seetha! By the fear of whom trees shed a shower of flowers, whenever 
Ravana desired mountains and clouds will shed water, why you are not making mind to be the wife of such Ravana, 
who is the king of ogres and king of kings."

"O Seetha with a good smile! O princess! Understand kind words spoken to you well and truly."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thus reflecting on many kinds of thought, Hanuma spoke the following sweet words within the hearing 
range of Seetha.

"There was a king named Dasaratha who was very glorious among the kings of Ikshvaku dynasty and 
had a virtuous disposition. He owned chariots, elephants and horses, becoming very famous.

"He was excellent in virtues among royal sages. He was equal to the seven sages in austerity. He 
was born in the lineage of emperors and was equivalent to Indra in prowess."

"He was keen on harmlessness. He was not vulgar. He was compassionate. He was truly mighty. He 
was an eminent king in Ikshvaku race. He was endowed with prosperity and was causing to increase prosperity."

"The king Dasaratha was endowed with royal characteristics, highly prosperous, excellent among 
kings and highly prosperous, excellent among kings and famous on earth with its four borders. He was happy man 
and gave happiness to others."

"There was an eldest son named Rama to that Dasaratha. Rama was beloved having a moon-like face. 
He, knows the distinctions among humans and others. He was excellent among all the wielders of the bow."

"That Rama who annihilates enemies, is a protector of his own mode of life, a protector of his 
own people, a protector of every living being and a protector of righteousness."

"By the command of that Dasaratha, his old father and true-speaking man, that Rama a brave man 
went on exile to a forest along with his wife and brother."

"While hunting in that forest, that Rama killed many demons who were valiant and who could assume 
any form at will."

"Thereafter, hearing about the killing of demons in Janasthana, a part of Dandaka forest, in addition 
to killing of Khara and Dushana the demons, the enraged Ravana took away, Seetha, by deceiving Rama in creating 
an illusive image of deer in the forest."

"Searching for Seetha the irreproachable lady, that Rama met a monkey called Sugreeva as his friend 
in the forest."

"Thereafter, Rama the conqueror of enemy's cities and very strong man, killed Vali and gave away 
that kingdom of monkeys to Sugreeva."

"As commanded and sent by Sugreeva, thousands of monkeys capable of assuming form at their will, 
are searching for that lady Seetha in all quarters of the earth."

"By the words of Sampati, I a swift monkey crossed the ocean having a length of one hundred yojanas 
for the sake of this broad eyed Seetha."

"This Seetha has been found by me according to the same comeliness, complexion and the bodily marks 
as I had heard from Rama."

Having spoken these words, Hanuma kept quiet. Hearing those words, Seetha too got a great surprise.

Thereafter, that Seetha whose consciousness was enshrouded by affliction, whose hair-ends were 
curved and who was of a fearful nature, lifted her face and looked towards Shimshupa tree.

Hearing Hanuma's words and looking at all quarters and sub-quarters, Seetha was recollecting Rama 
in all ways and obtained a great joy.

Looking at sides, up and down, that Seetha saw that Hanuman, the sun of wind-god, having an unimaginable 
intelligence, the minister of Sugreeva and looking like the sun behind an eastern mountain.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hanuma, with a rush equal to that of wind, withaut a fatigue, leapt across the baundless 
	sea looking analogaus to sky, like a large ship crossing the ocean. In that pleasant and auspiciaus 
	sky-like sea, shone the moon as a white water-like sea, shone having the constellations known by 
	the names of Pushya and Shravana as swans, the clauds as its duck-weeds; the twin constellations 
	the Punarvasus as its large fish, the planet Mars as its large alligator, a large island as Airavata 
	(Indra's elephant), graced with a swan in the form of the constellation, Shwati, having gales as 
	its waves, the moon bea.ns as its cool water and with the Nagas, yakshas and Gandharvas as its full 
	blown lotuses and water-lilies.

While moving in the sky, the illustrious Hanuma, the son of wind-god and the great 
	monkey, appeared as if swallowing the sky, scratching the moon and carrying off the sky with its 
	stars and the disc of the sun and was going as though dragging asunder, a mass of clouds.

Dense clauds, with white and red colaurs, blue and yellow colaurs as also green and 
	reddish brown colaurs shone brightly in the sky.

Time and again, entering and coming out of the clusters of clouds, Hanuma appeared 
	like the moon becoming visible and invisible again and again.

The heroic Hanuma, who was clad in white clothes, having faund his way into variaus 
	kinds of dense clauds (and energing again) and having his personlaity becoming visible and invisible, 
	shone like the moon in the sky.

Tearing asunder the clusters of clouds again and again as also energing from them 
	and roaring with a big noise, Hanuma the son of wind-god, making a thunderous great sound, shone 
	flying like Garuda the eagle, in the sky.

Killing the foremost of demons, becoming famaus by is name, making Lanka perplexed, 
	causing anguish to Ravana by tormenting his terrible army, and bidding his adieu to Sheetha, Hanuma 
	returned by flying over the middle of the sea.

Touching Mount Mainaka, the victorious Hanuma came with a great speed resembling 
	an iron arrow discharged from a bow-string.

Approaching a bit near and observing Maunt Mahendra, the great mauntain looking like 
	a dense claud, that Hanuma made a laud noise.

Emitting a great roar, that Hanuma, whole loud noise resembled the rumbling of a 
	cloud, filled the whole space in all directions with the noise.

Having reached that place, Hanuma who was ardently desiraus of seeing his friends, 
	roared and waved his tail.

The sky, with the disc of the sun, began to crack as it were, due to his roar, even 
	as he repeatedly roared on the path of the sky as followed by Garuda, the eagle endowed with charming 
	wings.

Those mighty heroes who were waiting already on the northern shore of the sea, with 
	an eagerness to see Hanuma, heard there at that time, the saund produced by the sweeping motion 
	of Hanuma's thighs, which resembled the reoar of a huge claud propelled by the wind.

All those monkeys, who were distressed in mind (for not having heard the news of 
	Seetha hitherto), heard Hanuma's roar similar to the roar of a rumbling cloud.

Hearing that roar of Hanuma, who was making the saund, all those mokeys stationed 
	there in all directions, became anxiausly desiraus of seeing their friend.

The Jambavan, the foremot among the monkesy and bears, with his mind thrilled with 
	joy, having summoned all the monkeys, spoke the follwoing words:

"This Hanuma has accoMplished his assignment in all ways. His saund will not indeed 
	be like this, if he has not fulfilled his task. There is not daubt in this matter."

Hearing the sound of the dashing movement of the high souled Hanuma's arms and thighs, 
	the monkeys moved by jumps with joy from their respective places.

Those monkeys with joy, longing to see Hanuma, took off from the top of one tree 
	to the tops of other trees as also from one mauntain-summit to the other summits.

Those monkeys, grasping the boughs at the tops of trees, and standing there firmly, 
	joyously waved the twigs, as if they are their raiments.

The mighty, Hanuma the son of wind-god, roared as thaugh the wind roars while it 
	enters the caves of mauntains.

Seeing that Hanuma then rushing like a dense cloud, all those monkeys stood there, 
	joining their palms in salutation.

The swift Hanuma, looking like a mauntain, then descended on the summit of that Maunt 
	mahendra, thick with trees.

Hanuma like a mountain with its wings torn off, thrilled with joy, fell from the 
	sky into a charming mountain-torrent.

Then, all the foremost of those monkeys, with their pleasing hearts, stood surraunding 
	the high-sauled Hanuma. Having encircled Hanuma, all of them obtained a supreme joy.

All those mokeys with their delightful faces, taking roots and fruits as their presents, 
	honured Hanuma, the foremost among the monkeys, who came back hale and healthy.

Then, Hanuma the excellent one among the monkeys, on his part, offered his salutation 
	to venerable persons and elders like Jambavan in the first place, as also Angada, the prince.

Jambavan and Angada honoured that victorious and venerable Hanuma. The other monkeys 
	also made him gracious. Hanuma informed them briefly that he had seen Seetha.

Then, seizing the hand of Angada, Vali's son, Hanuma sat down at a distinct spot 
	in the charming forest of Maunt Mahendra.

Then, the pleased Hanuma spoke the following words to those excellent monkeys: "I 
	saw that Seetha, the duaghter of Janaka, who was staying in Ashoka garden, guarded unblemished by 
	highly dreadful female-demons and wearing a single braid, young woman, as she was, longing to see 
	Rama, thoroughly fatigued due to her fasting, with her hair twisted together, wearing soiled clothes 
	and looking emaciated."

Hearing from Hanuma that iMportant and nectar like word to the effect that Sheetha 
	had been seen all the monkeys became delighted.

Some mighty monkeys made a lion's roar. Some were making a sound of approbation. 
	Some were making a sound of thunder. Some others proudced cries expressing joy. Some others were 
	roaring in return.

Shome eminent monkeys, with joy and with their tails lifted up, waved their distended 
	curved tails.

Descending from the mountain-tops; some other monkeys, with delight, fondingly touched 
	Hanuma who resembled an elephant.

After hearing the words of Hanuma, Angada spoke the follwoing excellent words in 
	the midst of those eminent monkeys.

"O Hanuma! Since you returned here crossing the extensive ocean, none stands equal 
	to you in strength and prowess."

"What amazing is yaur devotion to the Lord! What a wonderful prowess! What a surprising 
	caurage! By aur good fortune, yau saw the illustriaus Sheetha, Rama's consort. Thank heaven! Rama 
	can give up his sorrow born aut of Sheetha's separataion."

Very much delighted, the monkeys then sat on extensive flat rocks encircling Angada, 
	Hanuma and Jambavan.

Longing to hear abaut crossing of ocean and the seeing of Lanka, Sheetha and Ravana, 
	all those excellent monkeys waited with their joined pal.ns, in anctipation of Hanuma's words.

The auspicious Angada encircled by many monkeys there, waited like Indra the lord 
	of celestials, who was waited upon by celestials in heaven.

The high and large summit of the mauntain, on which were seated then with delight, 
	the illustriaus Hanuma and the famaus Angada, with bracelets worn on his upper ar.ns, stood blazed 
	with splendaur.

undefined

undefined

undefined

The great Hanuma then removing that thought became with the right mind and had another thought 
about Seetha.

That Seetha is not suitable to sleep separated from Rama, will not eat, will not decorate also, 
not suited to drink a beverage, to reach another man even though if he were Indra because there is indeed no one 
equaling Rama even among gods. This is another woman - thus deciding that Hanuma paced in that banqueting hall.

Some women were tired from erotic dalliance and then some other women were tired from singing; 
some others were weary from dance and were unconscious from consumption of liquor.

Some women were stationed on tabors, on Mrudangas, on seats, some other women rested on chief carpets.

The warrior among Vanaras saw a thousand of women decorated by jewellery with a nature of talking 
about beauty, conversing about the correct meaning of songs being sung, behaving according to time and place, 
wont to speak appropriate words, indulged in sleep after sexual dalliance.

In the middle of that group of women, Ravana with great arms shone like a bull in the middle of 
cows in a big cow-pen.

That Ravana himself surrounded by those women, shone like a great elephant surrounded by she elephants 
in a great forest.

The best among Vanaras saw in that wealthy Ravana's house a bar also, consisting of all desirables.

Hanuma saw there in that bar, meat of dear and of buffalo, of wild boar kept separately.

The best among Vanaras saw half eaten peacocks and chicken in wide vessels of golden colour.

Hanuma observed meat of pigs and goats, porcupines, deer and peacocks preserved in curds and sochal 
salt.

Hanuma saw birds called Krakara cooked ready to be eaten in variety of ways, birds called Chakoras 
half eaten, wild buffalos, fishes called ekashleya, goats, food to be licked of various kinds, beverages and various 
foods.

In the same way that floor was obtaining glory greatly with Ragas and Shadabas seasoned with sour 
and salty sauces, with necklaces, anklets and armlets of great value thrown around, with various fruits left in 
drinking vessels, with flowers sprinkled.

That bar was seen as though radiant without fire, with couches and chairs well arranged and placed 
there and there.

Many meats of different kinds cultured with various best seasonings, well arranged separately obtained 
that bar.

Excellent and clear various liquors, a liquor called Sura, liquor made of sugar, liquor made of 
honey, liquor made of flowers and liquors made of fruits also, artificially made liquors - those and those were 
cultured separately with various fragrant powders.

The floor shone filled by flower garlands in a variety of forms, with various vessels of golden 
hue and also made of crystal, filled with other small vessels of golden colour.

Hanuma saw indeed then lot of best quality liquor in pots of silver and of golden colour.

That great Hanuma saw vessels full of liquor of golden colour, embedded with gem stones and also 
of silver hue.

That Hanuma saw indeed at some places drinks half filled and at some places completely drunk and 
some places not at all drunk.

Hanuma paced about seeing at some places various eatables and at some places drinks separately, 
and at some places remnants of cooked rice.

Hanuma saw some places with vessels broken, some places with pots in shambles, some places with 
water together with flower garlands and fruits.

Here couches again of women were varied and clean, some best women slept there hugging one another.

Some women conquered by the power of sleep pulled other sleeping women's clothing and slept covering 
themselves.

Clothing and garland on the throats of those women was moving slightly and wonderfully as though 
obtaining air from the air of breath.

There wind blew carrying in a lot of directions, a variety of fragrances of cool sandal-paste and 
of sweet liquor, of various flower garlands and of various kinds of agallocum fumes.

Then the blossoming fragrance from the baths and sandal paste and from agallocum fumes blew spreading 
all around in that Pushpaka plane.

There in that Ravana's house, some women had fair and white complexion some best women were black, 
some women had a body of golden complexion.

Appearance of those sleeping women, tired from being possessed by sleep and from lust, was like 
lotuses sleeping.

Hanuma with great radiance thus saw entire Ravana's house completely but did not see Seetha.

Then that Hanuma seeing those women obtained great anguish being in doubt because of fear in the 
matter of dharma.

"My seeing sleeping house of other people's wives will do a great deficit to dharma."

"My sight is indeed not in the matter of other wives here. These other's wives have been seen by 
me."

To that Hanuma with an excellent mind, with a fixed and concentrated mind, was born another thought 
again, showing a fixed resolve in the task at hand.

"All Ravana's women who were in faith could have been seen by me; to my mind there indeed was not 
even a little disturbance".

"Among auspicious or inauspicious states in the behavior of all senses mind is the reason. My that 
mind is very steady."

"By me it is not possible to search Seetha at another place. Always during search women will be 
seen among other women."

"To an animal of whatever race that animal is searched in that race; a woman missing is not possible 
to be searched among female deer."

"For that reason all this Ravana's house has been search by me with a pure mind Seetha alone cannot 
be seen."

The strong Hanuma observing girls from devas, gandharvas and girls from nagas did not see Janaki.

The powerful Hanuma not seeing Her there and seeing other best women then started to think deeply 
going far from there.

That Hanuma the glorious one adopting a great task again left that bar and began to search that 
house.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Just on seeing Dadhimukha, who fell touching his feet with his head, Sugreeva the chief 
of monkeys, with an agitated mind, spoke the following words:

"O valiant monkey! Stand up, rise! Why have you fallen on my feet? I grant you immunity 
from fear. Let the entire truth be spoken!"

Thus inspired by the high-souled Sugreeva with confidence, that highly intelligent Dadhimukha, 
rising up, spoke the following words:

"O king! Madhuvana was indeed not set free previously at any time by Riksharajas, your 
father, or by you, or by even Vali. That Madhuvana has been consumed away by the monkeys."

"When these guards of the grove obstructed the monkeys, they disregarded the guards and 
continue to eat the fruits and drink the honey too."

"Some are throwing away a remnant of honey, after drinking it there and some others are 
consuming that remnant. When prevented by us, all of them are indeed exhibiting their eye-brows to us 
(in anger)."

"When these guards of the grove became angry and tried to keep them off from the grove, 
those enraged monkeys threatened them."

"O chief of monkeys! Then, those valiant monkeys in large numbers, having their red eyes 
in anger, drove away these monkeys."

"Those monkeys struck some of the guards with their hands. They beat some of them with 
their knees. They dragged some of them and tossed them into air."

"While you are in the position of a king, those monkeys have beaten these valiant guards 
and are eating away the entire Maduvana too."

Lakshmana, the killer of hostile heroes and a very wise man, asked that Sugreeva, the 
excellent of monkeys (as follows) while Dadhimukha was thus reporting to him:

"O king! Why has this monkey the garden-protector, come here?' Pointing out what matter 
has this monkey in grief, spoken these words to you?"

Hearing the words of the high-souled Lakshmana, the eloquent Sugreeva replied to him 
as follows:

"O esteemed Lakshmana! Dadhimukha, the valiant monkey is informing that the foremost 
of monkeys, who returned from the southern direction, after searching for Seetha as also Angada and 
other heroes consumed honey."

"By seeing the manner in which these returned monkeys overpowered, destroyed and behaved 
towards Madhuvana, we can deduce that the monkeys would not have indulged in such an exploit, had they 
not accomplished my purpose."

"When those monkeys have overpowered Madhuvana, then it means that our task has been 
accomplished by the monkeys. Seetha was found. There is no doubt. None other than Hanuma must have seen 
Seetha."

"There is none other than, Hanuma who is the executor in accomplishing this work. In 
that Hanuma, the foremost among the monkeys, capacity to accomplish any object; intelligence; strenuous, 
vigour effort; and learning are well established in his life."

"Where Jambavan as well as Angada are leaders and Hanuma is an administrator, the progress 
of that work cannot be as otherwise."

"It is so reported that Madhuvana has been destroyed by the heroes with Angada as the 
chief and the garden-guards who were together preventing the damage, were beaten up with knees."

"To tell this matter in sweet words, the monkey renowned by Dadhimukha by name, with 
his celebrated prowess, has come here."

"O the long-armed Lakshmana! Perceive the truth that Seetha has been seen and see that 
all monkeys, getting together, are drinking honey."

"O Lakshmana, the foremost among men! If the renowned monkeys have not seen Seetha, they 
would not have abused the charming grove; which was granted as a boon."

Then, the righteous Lakshmana, together with Rama, felt delighted. Hearing the words 
coming from the mouth of Sugreeva, which were pleasant for the ears, Rama was rejoiced. The mighty Lakshmana 
too was very much rejoiced.

Hearing those words of Dadhimukha, Sugreeva with a charming neck, was very much pleased 
and further spoke to Dadhimukha, the guardian of the grove (as follows):

"I am happy that Madhuvana has been enjoyed by those monkeys, who have accomplished their 
act. Since the act (damage to the grove) done by those monkeys, who have accomplished their purpose 
is fit to be forgiven, I pardon them.

"I, together with Rama and Lakshmana, soon desire to see those monkeys, with Hanuma as 
their chief, who having acquired the pride of a lion and who attained his purpose; and also to hear 
about their effort in finding out Seetha."

Seeing Rama and Lakshmana with their eyes filled with ecstatic delight, the princes, 
who were thrilled with joy and who accomplished their aim, Sugreeva that king of the monkeys was very 
much delighted, knowing that accomplishment of their work is coming close to their hands and his limbs 
were thrilled with joy.

undefined

undefined

undefined

A little of the night was left while Hanuma was searching like that for Seetha in the garden with 
flowers in blossom.

That Hanuma heard Vedic sounds early in the morning of Brahma Rakshasas well versed in six parts 
of Vedas and those who performed excellent sacrifices.

Thereafter Ravana with great arms and great prowess was woken by the sounds of various auspicious 
musical instruments pleasing to the ear.

The king of rakshasas with great might woke up at the appropriate hour wearing slippery flower 
garlands remembered about Seetha.

In that Seetha's matter, directed a lot by the god of love and excited by passion, that Rakshasa 
was not capable to suppress in self that desire.

Together with all ornaments wearing great glory that Ravana entered that Ashoka garden having a 
lot of trees with all fruits and flowers.

Ravana entered that great wonderful Ashoka garden together with lakes, shone by various flowers, 
brilliant with birds always in rut.

Ravana entered Ashoka garden seeing archways of gold and gems crowded by artificial deer of various 
kinds ravishing eyes and mind, filled with animals of various kinds, together with fallen fruits and full of trees.

While He was going only a hundred of women followed that Ravana like Deva and Gandharva women following 
Indra.

There some women bore lamps of gold; some others carried chowries; some others had fans of Palmyra 
leaves in their hands.

Some women carried water in small vessels of gold; some others followed in the back taking pillows 
with circular ends.

One woman to the right of Ravana held with her right hand a vessel with gem stones filled with 
liqour.

Another woman went at back taking an umbrella equalling a royal swan with the radiance of full 
moon with a golden handle.

With sleepy eyes best women of Ravana followed mighty husband like lightning following a cloud.

With displaced necklaces and armlets, with effaced cover of sandal-paste, with dishevelled hair, 
and also with sweaty faces, staggering due to surviving trace of liquor and due to sleepiness, with shrivelled 
flowers on perspiring bodies, with dishevelled hair along with good garlands, with intoxicating eyes, women who 
were dear wives followed that king of Rakshasas who was going due to respect and due to love.

Husband of those women, of great might, who was surrendered to lust, that Ravana also who was dull 
witted, with his mind interested in Seetha shone with a slow and beautiful gait.

Thereafter that Hanuma, the son of wind-god heard the sound of waist-bands and the sound of anklets 
of those excellent women.

Hanuma the monkey saw that Ravana also, performer of deeds without an equal, with unfathomable 
might and virility, reaching the entrance region.

Wettened by fragrant oil, being carried in front of Ravana, Hanuma saw Ravana being shone in all 
directions by many lamps.

Hanuma saw Ravana together with lust, vanity and intoxication, with wide red eyes which were slanted, 
like the god of love in person with bow kept at a distance.

Hanuma saw Ravana playfully readjusting his excellent upper garment with the luster of churned 
nectar froth, without stain,slipping being entangled in armlet.

Hanuma blended in a branch full of leaves covered by groups of leaves and flowers started to see 
that Ravana as though coming near Him.

Thereafter Hanuma, the best among Vanaras looking in all directions saw best women of Ravana full 
of beauty and youth.

King of great fame, Ravana, together with those women with good appearance entered that garden 
resounded by animals and birds.

That king of Rakshasas who was intoxicated with wonderful ornaments, with pointed ears, son of 
Visravasa was like the moon together with stars, together with best women was seen by Hanuma. That great Vanara 
with great brilliance saw that Ravana with glory.

The son of god of wind Vanara Hanuma of great brilliance thinking thus "This long armed one is 
Ravana", jumped down.

Thus Hanuma although of terrible energy was overshadowed by Ravana's brilliance and became rooted 
behind a group of leaves and was concealed.

That Ravana neared Seetha with black hair, with charming limbs with well knit breasts, with black 
corners of eyes, wishing to see Her.

undefined

undefined

undefined


That Hanuma with great strength crossed the insurmountable ocean without becoming tired and viewed the city of 
Lanka located on the peak of Mount Trikuta.


After that, the powerful Hanuma standing there shone like one made of flowers being showered by a rain of flowers 
released by trees.


The glorious Hanuma with the best courage, even though crossing a hundred yojanas, was without a sigh and did 
not obtain any tiredness.


"I can cross many hundreds of yojanas. What to say about the end of the ocean which had been counted to be hundred 
yojanas long?"


That Hanuma, the best among powerful ones and the foremost also among those who can fly, reached the city of Lanka 
by crossing the great ocean with good speed.


He passed through forests with dark green hued fragrant lawns and also consisting of great rocks and hills.


Hanuma, the best among Vanaras and the radiant one, tread on mountains covered with trees and on series of trees 
full of flowers.


That son of God Vayu stood on a mountain and saw forests and gardens and also the city of Lanka situated on the 
top of a mountain.


Standing on that mountain, the elephant among monkeys, Hanuma, saw pine trees, Karnikaras, date-palms in full 
blossom, Priyalas, lemon trees, wild jasmine trees, mogra trees, long pepper trees filled with sweet fragrance, 
Kadamba trees and seven leaved banana trees, Asana trees, Kovidaras, Karaviras in full blossom, trees that were 
tied by the weight of their flowers and flower buds, that were distressed by birds, with their crests moved by 
wind, wells and various glorious pleasure-groves filled by various trees that give fruits and flowers in all seasons 
and beautiful gardens also, surrounded by various ponds consisting of swans and ducks.


The glorious Hanuma neared the city of Lanka ruled by Ravana, and saw the city which looked like the city of Gods 
in heaven, decorated by moats filled with lotuses and water-lilies, which was well protected, since the time of 
Seetha's abduction, by Ravana and by Rakshasas with horrifying voices roaming around, which was surrounded by 
a golden boundary wall, that beautiful great city consisted of houses equal in height to mountains and which looked 
like autumnal clouds, with white and elevated main streets, decorated with flags and pennons, with excellent golden 
hued archways adorned with sculpted rows of vines.


That best among monkeys Hanuma saw the city of Lanka with beautiful white buildings situated on the top of a mountain 
like a city located in the sky.


Hanuma saw that city of Lanka ruled by Ravana the king of Rakshasas, constructed by Visvakarma (architect of Gods), 
and which looked as though it were floating in the sky.


Hanuma saw the city of Lanka with buttress and enclosure wall as her hip and loins, the vast body pf water in 
the moat as her raiment, Satagnis and Sulas as her locks, the mansions as her earrings, constructed by thought. 
He reached the northern gate and thought thus.


Hanuma saw the city of Lanka equal to peak of Kailasa as though touching the sky, as though flying to reach the 
sky, with its best mansions, filled with horrible rakshasas and serpants like the city of Bhogavati (capital of 
Patala), one which was unfathomable, a well arranged and a clear city governed by Kubera in earlier times, protected 
by courageous, horrible serpents and Rakshasas with mouths with sharp teeth like a cave, with spikes and Pattisas 
(spears) in their hands. Hanuma saw that Lanka's great protection and the ocean and Ravana the horrible enemy 
and thought thus.


"Even if Vanaras were to come here they would not meet with success. It is not possible even for Devas to be victorious 
against Lanka in war".


"Even if He reaches this very difficult and impenetrable Lanka ruled by Ravana, what can that Sri Rama with mighty 
arms do"?


"In the matter of overcoming rakshasas, there seems to be no opportunity for persuasion, gifts, dissension or 
even war".


"Only four great Vanaras can come here - the son of Vali (Angada), Nila, myself and the wise king Sugriva".


"I will first find out if Seetha is alive or not. I will think all this later, after seeing that daughter of Janaka".


After that, that elephant among monkeys Hanuma who was interested in the welfare of Sri Rama, stood on that mountain 
peak and thought for an instant.


"It is not possible for me to enter the city of ogres protected by cruel and strong rakshasas, with this appearance".


"All these mighty ogres with extraordinary energy and great prowess are to be cheated by me while engaged in the 
search of Seetha".


"To achieve this great deed successfully, entering the city of Lanka in a small form at night is a timely thing 
to do" .


Hanuma saw such that city of Lanka, which was difficult to overcome even for Devas or asuras, and thought thus 
repeatedly.


"By what idea can I see Seetha the daughter of Janaka, unseen by the wicked Ravana, the king of the ogres.


"How can the task of Sri Rama, one who knows self, not be destroyed? How can I alone see Seetha alone in a place 
devoid of people?."


"With a mediator who has an unsteady and gloomy mind working against time and place, tasks that are otherwise 
ready to succeed get harmed, like the darkness that gets destroyed at dawn".


"Even a decided mind will not shine when thinking about gain and loss. Mediators who are respected by scholarly 
people will also harm tasks due to their arrogance."


"How will the task at hand be not harmed? How will my mind not get gloominess? How will not the crossing of ocean 
go waste?."


"If I were to be seen by rakshasas, this task of Sri Rama, with a famed mind, who desires the slaying of Ravana 
will become wasteful."


"It is not possible to be in Lanka even in the form of a rakshasa. What to say about being there in any other 
form?"


"My thought goes thus: Even wind cannot pass here without being known. There is nothing not known to the might 
rakshasas."


"If I stay here with my usual form, I can be destroyed. The task of the Lord will also be harmed."


"For that reason, I will become small in my appearance and will enter Lanka at night for the success of the task 
of Sri Rama."


"Entering the unapproachable city of Lanka at night and searching all the mansion of Ravana, I can see Seetha."


The courageous Hanuma thus thinking and being interested in discovering Seetha, then desired the sun to set.


After the sun had set, Hanuma reduced His body at night with a size equal to that of a cat and became a wonderful 
sight to behold.


The courageous Hanuma quickly flew during evening time and entered the beautiful city with well divided main pathways.


Hanuma saw that great city filled with series of mansions, golden hued pillars and window lattices, which was 
equal to the city of Gandharvas, consisting of seven and eight storied buildings with their top portions studded 
with crystals and pearls and decorated with gold.


There in that city of Lanka, the houses of rakshasas shone with top portions painted by cats-eyes and emeralds 
and decorated by groups of pearls.


Golden archways with strange hues illuminated the well decorated city of Lanka in all directions.


Hanuma on seeing the unimaginable city of Lanka with a wonderful appearance became sad thinking about the prospect 
of capturing Lanka and also happy being eager to see Seetha.


Hanuma saw that city of Lanka of great fame, with white, closely built buildings having golden windows and doorways 
of great value, consisting of ogres of great strength and ruled by the hands of Ravana.


The shining moon too rose up with its many thousands of rays, as though performing help to Hanuma, being at the 
middle of its retinue of stars and covering the earth with a canopy of light. That Hanuma saw the moon rising 
up with a glow of a conch shell, shining with a milky white hue of a lotus-fiber, like a swan swimming in a lake.


That Hanuma saw the moon, who was rising up in the sky with the splendour of a couch-shell, shining in white colour 
as milk or lotus-fibre, and looking like a swan swimming in a lake.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hanuma the leader of Vanaras crossed from pushpaka toward the fort wall and became with speed like 
lighting in the middle of a cloud.

The simian Hanuma went far from the house of Ravana and not seeing Seetha, the daughter of King 
Janaka, said these words:

"The city of Lanka has been mostly explored by me attempting for the pleasure of Rama. But I am 
unable to see Seetha, beautiful in all limbs, and the daughter of Videha."

"All earth consisting of pools, ponds, lakes and streams, rivers and forest areas filled with water, 
mountains difficult of access have been explored but I did not see Seetha."

"It has been said by the eagle King Sampati that Seetha is here in the house of Ravana. I am unable 
to see her."

"Otherwise Seetha belonging to Videha born in Mithila and daughter of king Janaka - Can she be 
helplessly together with the evil minded Ravana."

"I think while Ravana fearing Rama's arrows flew quickly carrying Seetha, she might have fallen 
down in the middle of the journey."

"Or I think the heart of the noble Seetha being stolen in the path served by Siddhas must have 
sunk at the site of the ocean."

"I think due to great speed of Ravana and due to the torture of Ravana's shoulders the life has 
been given up by that noble one with wide eyes."

"Then while being flown upon the surface of the ocean, Seetha definitely fell down in the ocean 
while wriggling."

"Or has the austere Seetha been eaten by this Ravana, the evil minded one while she was protecting 
her chastity without any relatives near her."

"Otherwise not being evil with black eyes, She may have been eaten by the wives of Ravana with 
evil thoughts."

"The pitiable Seetha equaling full moon, with eyes equaling lotus petals must have obtained death 
while meditating upon Rama's face."

"The daughter of Videha, Seetha. O Rama!' O Lakshmana!' O Ayodhya!', thus weeping greatly may 
have given up her body."

"I think otherwise being put in the house of Ravana Seetha is definitely crying like a caged myna."

"How can the daughter of King Janaka, Rama's wife Seetha with a beautiful waist, with eyes like 
black lotus petals obtain Ravana's capture."

"It is not fair to let know Rama who has a dear wife if Seetha is lost or is not to be seen or 
has died."

"To be let known becomes an error; not to let know becomes an error how to perform the duty? To 
me this seems dire situation."

"This task while it goes this way the time is approaching. What becomes appropriate" thus Hanuma 
thought again this view point.

"If I go towards Sugreeva's city from here without seeing Seetha from that to what avail will this 
effort be?"

"My crossing of the ocean entering the city of Lanka the site of rakshasas - all this will become 
waste."

"To me reaching Kishkindha what would Sugreeva say or Vanaras there or those sons of Dasharatha 
what would they say?"

"Going there by me for Rama, Seetha has not been seen' - thus if I say a very unpleasant word 
thereafter Rama will give up life."

"Hearing bad word belonging to Seetha that is harsh, horrible, cruel, sharp, sense agonizing, He 
will not exist."

"Seeing that Rama being with troubles, being with a heart towards death, Lakshmana, one with great 
love and an intellectual will not exist."

"Hearing brothers to be dead, Bharata also will die. Seeing the dead Bharata, Shatrughana also 
will not exist."

"Thereafter seeing sons to be dead the mothers Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi will not exist - there 
is no doubt."

"Grateful, true to pledge Sugreeva, the leader of Vanaras, seeing Rama the leader of Vanaras seeing 
Rama die in that way will give up life thereafter."

"Being tortured by the sorrow of husband, made sad by a gloomy heart, disconsolate without happiness, 
to be pitied, Ruma will give up life."

"Being distressed from the sorrow of Vali, being emaciated from grief, Tara also will not exist 
while the king Sugreeva is obtaining death."

"The young Angada also from the death of mother and father, from the grief of Sugreeva - why will 
he retain life?"

"Vanaras being rejected by the sorrow due to their lord will strike their heads with palms and 
fists."

"Vanaras loved by the famous king Sugreeva through good words, through small gifts, through respect 
will give up lives."

"Best among Vanaras will not enjoy together sport in forest, not on mountains, not again in covered 
places."

"Together with wife and children and together with ministers being tortured by grief of their lord, 
they will fall down from top of mountains on to flat lands and on to rugged lands."

"Vanaras will perform death by taking poison or getting hanged or entering fire or fasting or a 
weapon."

"While I am going I think about the destruction of Ikshvaaku dynasty and destruction of Vanaras 
and there will be a terrible wail."

"I will not go from here to the Kishkindha city. I am not capable to see Sugreeva without Seetha."

"I while not going, being here those virtuous ones, those great warriors those two Rama and Lakshmana 
will live by hope. Vanaras also who are agile will live."

"Without seeing Seetha subsisting on whatever falls on hand, whatever comes to mouth, being self 
restrained I will become a hermit living on trees and herbs at a region near ocean which has many roots, fruits 
and much water."

"Or I will enter fire which is glowing after making a funeral pile or while sitting performing 
fasting onto death my body will be eaten by crows and by beasts of prey."

"This way to giving up body has been seen by sages. This is my opinion if I do not see Seetha, 
I will enter lot of water."

"Not seeing Seetha, my garland of glory of long time with a strong foundation, beautiful one together 
with fame has been destroyed."

"I will become a hermit who is self restrained resorting to trees and herbs, I will not go from 
here not seeing Seetha with black eyes."

"If I go back from here without knowing that Seetha, there will not be Angada together with all 
those Vanaras."

"There are lots of blemishes in dying; one who is alive sees auspicious things. For that reason 
I will keep my life. It is definite for the meeting of people who are alive."

Hanuma carrying in mind sorrow of various kinds again and again did not get then the crossing of 
sorrow.

"Otherwise I will kill Ravana with ten heads, with great prowess. Whatever happened to the stolen 
Seetha, this will be revenge to that."

"Otherwise carrying this Ravana over the surface of ocean I will take him to Rama like an animal 
to the lord of animals."

Hanuma not seeing that Seetha thus begetting sorrow, thought with a mind cluttered with thoughts 
and sorrow.

"To wherever I see Seetha, the wife of Sri Rama and one with fame, till there I will search the 
city of Lanka again and again."

"Based on words of Sampati if I bring Sri Rama then Sri Rama not seeing wife will burn all Vanaras."

"With limited food and with restrained senses, I live here itself. By my deed those men and vanaras 
- let they not be destroyed."

"Whatever this Ashoka garden with great trees is being seen this I will obtain. This has not been 
searched by me."

"Saluting the eight Vasus, Rudras and Adityas, the two Aswinis, seven Maruts, I will go to increase 
the grief of Rakshasas."

"Defeating all rakshasas, I will give Seetha, who gives happiness to Ikshvaaku dynasty to Sri Rama 
as the fruit of austerity to an ascetic."

The gloried son of Vayu that Hanuma got up with his senses tied by grief.

"Let there be salutations to Sri Rama together with Lakshmana, also to that, who is divine let 
there be salutations. To Rudra, Indra, Yama and Vaayu let there be salutations."

That Hanuma saluting to all those and also to Sugreeva, observing all directions went towards Ashoka 
garden.

The son of Vayu, that Vanara went by mind before itself toward that Ashoka garden. The auspicious 
one pondered the task to be done later.

"The Ashoka garden definitely will be with many rakshasas, filled with trees, adorned with various 
cultures and sacred."

"There definitely guards will be protecting assigned, trees, omnipresent Lord Vayu also will be 
blowing by without force, and by me this body has been made small for the sake of Sri Rama and to avoid Ravana."

"Devas together with ascetics will make success to me here, self born Brahma the divine one and 
devas and Agni and Vaayu, Devendra wearing the weapon of Vajra and Varuna with Pasha in hand and also the Sun 
and the moon and the aswinis. The great ones Maruts and Eshwara may give my success. Whoever is the lord of all 
living creatures among all living beings others who being unseen exist in the path may give success to me."

"When will I see that noble face with a high nose, with white teeth without any injuries with a 
bright smile, with eyes resembling lotus petals with sight equaling the splendor of clear full moon?"

"How that powerless Seetha, a helpless one, forcefully taken away by the mean vile Ravana with 
a cruel action, with a horribly decorated form will fall in the range of my sight today."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing Hanuma's words, Seetha whose face resembled the full moon, spoke the following 
words braced with justice and utility, to Hanuma.

"O Hanuma! The words spoken by you viz. that Rama is not having any other thoughts (than 
on me) and is fully overwhelmed by sorrow are like ambrosia mixed with poisons."

"Destiny drags out a man into a very extensive fortune or into a very dreadful adversity, 
as if being dragged, tied with ropes."

"O Hanuma the best of monkeys! For living beings, destiny is surely irresistible. See 
how Lakshmana, myself and Rama are baffled by misfortunes."

"When will Rama reach the end of this grief any more than a thoroughly fatigued man, 
having suffered a ship wreck is swimming in the middle of the sea?"

"When will my husband see me, after annihilation of the demons, killing of Ravana and 
making the City of Lanka debacled?."

"Till the current period of one year is not completed, that Rama is to be told to make 
haste to save me; since my life will be lasting till such time only."

"O Hanuma! Out of the time-limit given to me by the cruel Ravana for my survival, the 
tenth month is now running. Only two months are left out."

"Even when humbly entreated with continued exertion by Vibhishana his brother about my 
restoration (to Rama), Ravana is not making up his mind to do so."

"My restoration is not agreeable to Ravana. In the battle, death lies in wait for Ravana, 
who has become subject to the power of Time."

"O Hanuma! Nala, the eldest maiden daughter of Vibhishana, when she was sent personally 
to me by her mother, told me about this."

"O Hanuma the excellent of monkeys! Rama, my husband, will soon regain me without any 
doubt. Because my heart is pure and in Rama also, there are many good qualities existing."

"O Hanuma! In Rama are figured, pesseverence, manliness, courage, non-mischievousness, 
gratitude, prowess and energy."

"Which Rama, who without the help of Lakshmana his brother, killed fourteen thousand 
demos in Janasthana (part of the forest), what adversary will not have fear of such a man?"

"Rama, the excellent among men, is not compelled to be moved by troubles. I now well 
the energy of Rama, as Shachi the wife of Indra knows the energy of Indra the Lord of celestials."

"O Hanuma! The powerful Rama like the sun, with his multitude of ray-like arrows, will 
dry up the water in the form of hostile adversaries."

Hanuma spoke the following words to Seetha, who was thus talking with grief for Rama 
and with her eyes full of tears."

"Soon after hearing my words, Rama will soon come, engaging a great army comprising of 
a multitude of monkeys and bears with him."

"O Seetha with a charming face! Or rather, I shall relieve you from this grief now itself. 
O irreproachable lady! Ascend my back. I shall take you to Rama."

"I shall cause you sit on my back and cross the ocean. I have indeed capacity to carry 
even Lanka together with Ravana."

"O Seetha! Now itself, I shall cause you to reach Rama who is staying at Prasravana Mountain, 
even as fire-god hands over the oblations offered in the sacrifices to Indra the Lord of celestials."

"O Seetha! Now itself, you can see Rama together with Lakshmana, getting ready for a 
strenuous effort to annihilate the demons, as Vishnu the Lord of Preservation getting ready for killing 
of demons."

"The mighty Rama, with a gusto to see you, is staying in a hermitage, even as Indra the 
destroyer of strong-holds sitting on the back of Airavata the elephant."

"O Seetha the auspicious princess! Mount on my back. Do not have any hesitation. Be inclined 
of joining Rama even as Rohini, moon's favourite wife, joined the moon."

"You ascend my back and cross the ocean by journeying through the sky, as though speaking 
to the greatly resplendent sun and to the moon."

"O Seetha! While I am taking you from here, no body staying in Lanka is competent to 
come along with me."

"O Seetha! In what manner I reached here, in the same manner, I shall move through the 
sky, taking you along with me. See, there is no doubt."

Hearing those astonishing words from Hanuma, Seetha with her entire limbs flowered with 
joy, thereafter spoke to Hanuma (as follows):

"O Hanuma! How are you wishing to carry me for such a long distance? O chief of monkeys! 
I consider this indeed as your apishness!"

"O Hanuma the best of monkeys! With such a small seized body, how do you wish to take 
me from here to the presence of my husband, Rama the Lord of human beings?"

Hearing the words of Seetha, the illustrious Hanuma, the son of wind-god thought it to 
be the first insult was caused to him.

(Hanuma said to himself); "The black-eyed Seetha is not aware of my strength or power. 
That is why, let her see the form I can assume at will."

Hanuma, the best of monkeys and the annihilator of enemies, thinking in this way, then 
showed his peculiarity to Seetha.

Hanuma, the intelligent and the excellent of monkeys, leaped down from that tree and 
then, to create confidence in Seetha, started to increase his body-form.

Hanuma, the foremost of monkeys, flashed like Meru and Mandara mountains, shining brightly 
like a blazing fire. He thus stood too in front of Seetha.

The mighty Hanuma, resembling a mountain, having a red face, having teeth and nails as 
hard as adamant and terrific in appearance, spoke the following words to Seetha.

"To me, there is capability to carry this Lanka along with its hills, forest-areas, market-places, 
defensive walls and arches together with its Lord Ravana himself."

"O princess! For this reason, leave your suspicion and keep you mind steady. Come along 
with me and make Rama and Lakshmana bereft of grief."

Seetha, with her large eyes resembling lotus-petals, spoke to that terrific Hanuma, the 
son of wind-god (as follows)

"O great monkey! I know fully well your courage, strength, your power of movement like 
that of the wind and your wonderful brilliance like that of the fire."

"O the best of monkeys! How can any other common person cross this unfathomable ocean 
and reach this place?"

"I know your capacity of carrying and taking me from here. However, we have to determine 
soon whether the accomplishment of work by the high souled Rama would not thus get spoiled."

"O the faultless one! O the excellent of monkeys! It is not befitting of me to go with 
you. For, your speed resembling the winds speed, may bewilder my mind."

"Reaching the sky high above the sea, I will fall down out of fear from your back even 
as you sweep with speed."

"Having fallen insensible into the sea, which is filled with sharks, crocodiles and giant 
fish, I may become the best food soon for the aquatic creatures."

"O Hanuma the annihilator of enemies! It is not possible for me to go with you. There 
will also be a risk for you, having me a lady additionally to protect. There is no doubt."

"Seeing me being taken away by you, the demons of terrific prowess, incited by the evil-minded 
Ravana, will follow you."

"O brave monkey! Those valiant demons wielding darts and clubs in their hands will surround 
you. Accompanied by a lady in me, you will be at a risk."

"Many demons will come with their weapons, in the sky. You will be alone without any 
weapon. How can you continue your travel, while protecting me?"

"O the best of monkeys! While you will be resorting to battle with those demons, who 
perform cruel acts, I, stricken with fear, may fall down from your back."

"O excellent of monkeys! Then the powerful and terrific demons with their giant bodies 
will conquer you in battle, somehow or other."

"Otherwise, if you are indifferent of me and resort to battle, I may eventually fall 
down. Then, the wicked demons, catching hold of me fallen, may take me again to Lanka."

"Or they may take me away from your hand, or may even kill me. In battle, victory and 
defeat are perceived as uncertain."

"O the best of monkeys! Or while I am frightened by the demons, I may get into a mishap. 
Thus, your effort may become futile indeed!"

"You may be surely able to kill all the demons. But if you alone kill all the demons, 
Rama's celebrity will be lowered."

"Otherwise, the demons may take me away and hide me in any secret place that will not 
be known by those monkeys or even Rama and Lakshmana."

"Then your effort taken for my sake will become futile. That is why there is a great 
merit in Rama's coming here along with you."

"O Hanuma the long-armed! The survival of the high souled Rama, his brothers, of yourself 
and of your royal family (of Sugreeva) is dependent on me."

"Those two men Rama and Lakshmana who are emaciated by grief and anguish along with all 
bears and monkeys, losing their hope, will abandon their lives."

"O Hanuma, the best of monkeys! Honouring the devotion to my husband, I cannot touch 
the body of any man other that of Rama."

"That I got, by force, the touch of Ravana's body, was because being helpless, having 
lost control of myself and without a protector, I could not do anything."

"If Rama kills Ravana here along with his relatives and departs taking me from here, 
it would be proper for him"

"I have not only heard but seen myself about the strength of the high souled Rama destroying 
enemies in battle. Neither the celestials nor the divine musicians nor the serpent-gods nor the demons 
are equal to Rama in combat."

"Who can withstand seeing in battle that mighty Rama, dazzling like fire fanned by wind, 
wielding his conspicuous bow and having prowess equal to that of Indra the Lord of celestials, together 
with Lakshmana?"

"O the best of monkeys! In battle, who can endure Rama resembling the sun at noon-time, 
with his arrows resembling its rays, the destroyer in battle, stationed like a mythical elephant in 
rut, along with Lakshmana?

"O the excellent of monkeys! You, as such, soon bring my husband here along with Lakshmana, 
and the chiefs of army. O the best of monkeys! I am emaciated with grief about Rama since long. Make 
me now joyful."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Then, after fulfilling his heart's wish, Hanuma, looking over Lanka, thought about the 
remaining act to be done, with an augmented energy.

"Which act indeed is remaing nowto be done by me here, that may further create anguish 
to these demons?"

"I have demolished the garden. I have killed excellent demons. I destroyed a portion 
of the army. The demolition of the fort is still remaining."

"When the fort gets destroyed, the task (of Rama's battle) will be devoid of fatigue. 
Even with a small effort in this task, the work will become fruitful."

"It is justified to satisfy this blazing flame on my tail, by feeding it to the full, 
with these excellent houses (in the city of Lanka)."

Then, Hanuma, with his burning tail, strolled over the house-tops of Lanka, like a cloud 
charged with lightning.

Surveying the gardens and lofty palatial mansions, that Hanuma, without fear, passed 
from one house to another, of the demons.

Jumping down on Prahasta's house, the valiant Hanuma, with great swiftness, having strength 
equal to wind, scattering fire on it, jumped over from there, to another house belonging to Mahaparsva. 
Hanuma, with great swiftness, having strength equal to wind, scattering fire on it, jumped over from 
there, to another house belonging to Mahaparsva. Hanuma scattered a fire there resembling a flame of 
fire that is to destroy the world.

That Hanuma, of great splendour, then leapt to the houses of Vajradamshtra, Shuka and 
Sarana, the intelligent.

Leaving the house of Vibhishana, Hanuma of great splendour, went successively to the 
houses of Rashmiketu, Surya shatru, Hrasvakarna, Damshtra, Romasha the demon, Yuddhonmatta, Matta, Dhvajagreeva 
the demon, the terrific Vidyujjihva, Hastimukha, Karala, Pishacha, Shonitaaksha, Kumbhakarna, Makaraksha, 
Yajnashatru, Brahmashatru, Narantaka, Kumbha as also the evil-minded Nikumbha and burnt the houses.

That Hanuma of great fame burnt away wealth in the mansions of the rich.

Having passed over all the houses, the mighty and glorious Hanuma thereafter approached 
the house of Ravana the king of demons.

Thereafter, scattering a blazing fire located at the tip of his tail, on that principal 
house, decorated with various kinds of precious stones, resembling Mounts Meru and Mandara as also embellished 
with all good work, the valiant Hanuma roared like a cloud thundering at noon-time in a rainy season.

In contact with the wind, the fire escalated with a great speed and intensity, blazing 
like a fire that is to destroy the world.

The wind carried the blazing fire to other houses. In conjunction with the wind, the 
fire became very swift.

Those large houses, with golden windows, embedded with pearls, gems and precious jewels 
were shattered to pieces.

The demons, who were running hither and thither to protect their houses and who lost 
their spirits and abundant wealth, created a tumultuous nose, saying "Alas! The fire-god has come really 
in a form of this monkey!"

Some women crying and carrying their suckling's with their hair dishevelled, fell down 
from their houses, which were enveloped with fire, and shone like flashes of lightning falling from 
clouds in the sky.

That Hanuma saw molten metals mixed with diamonds, corals, cat's eye-gems, pearls and 
silver, surging from every marvellous house.

As the fire does not get satisfied with any amount of firewood and straw fed to it, Hanuma 
was not wearied in killing any number of demons. The earth was not then wearied in receiving the number 
of demons killed by Hanuma (in her lap).

Flames of fire glittered like Kimshuka flowers at some places, blossoms of Shalmali tree 
at some places and like saffron-flowers at some other places.

The high souled Hanuma, the swift monkey scorched the city of Lanka, as Rudra scorched 
the city of Tripura.

Then, the fire having a terrific prowess, diffused by the swift Hanuma, stretching out 
a circle of flames, blazed and rose up to the summit of the mountain on which the city of Lanka.

That fire diffused on those buildings, together with the wind picked up a speed equal 
to that of a fire at the time of dissolution of the world. It grew taller, touching the sky with a smokeless 
splendour. Those flames of fire shot up, as inflamed by ghee

The great fire persisted, surrounding the entire Lanka, having a good splendour equal 
to that of millions of suns and blazed like a broken-up hemi-sphere of the world, creating many sounds 
of a wide-spread thunderbolt.

The fire with a fierce splendour there, extended fully to the sky, shooting flames like 
Kumshuka flowers. The clouds, bearing the colour of blue lotuses, shone as covered by smoke formed out 
of the extinguished fire.

"He is not a monkey. He is either Indra the Lord of celestials wielding a thunderbolt, 
or Yama the lord of death of water, or the wind-god or the fire seated in the third eye of Lord Shiva 
or the sun-god or Kubera the lord of riches or the moon-god. He may be Kala (the Time-spirit) himself."

"Whether the rage of four-faced Brahma, the grand father of all and the creator of all 
has arrived here in the guise of a monkey, playing the role of a destroyer of demons?"

"Or whether a supreme bright energy of Vishnu, the lord of maintenance of the Universe, 
unthinkable, unmanifest, infinite and pearless, arrived now, assuming the form of a monkey for the destruction 
of demons, by virtue of Her extraordinary power?"

Thus spoke all those excellent troops of demons in multitude, gathering together there, 
on seeing that city scorched so soon, with its host of living beings, houses and trees.

Then, Lanka having been scorched with its demons, horses, chariots, elephants, multitude 
of birds, animals and trees, cried pitiably with tumultuous noise.

Making a very terrific noise with a dreadful sound, the demons cried in various ways 
as follows: "O my dear beloved son! O my beloved husband! O my friend! O my very auspicious life, filled 
with enjoyments!"

That Lanka appeared as though afflicted by a curse, as defeated by a strong fury of Hanuma, 
enveloped by flames of fire, with its distinguished heroes killed and with its warriors in retreat.

Hanuma, with his great mind, saw Lanka with its dazed, frightened and dejected demons, 
marked by blazing flames of fire and afflicted by the fury of Brahma the creator of the universe.

After demolishing the garden which was full of excellent trees, killing great demons 
in battle and burning that city endowed with a series of excellent houses, Hanuma the monkey and the 
son of wind-god, stood at ease.

Standing there on the wonderful flat summit of Mount Trikuta, Hanuma the foremost leader 
of the monkeys, having a garland of flames formed by his blazing tail, shone like the sun having a garland 
of rays.

Killing those multitudes of demons, demolishing that garden endowed with several trees 
and scattering fire on the houses of demons, the high-souled Hanuma sought Rama with his mind.

Then, all the multitude of celestials enlogised that Hanuma, the principal warrior of 
the monkeys, possessing great strength and swiftness similar to the wind, greatly intelligent and the 
most excellent.

Demolishing the garden, killing the demons in battle, Hanuma of great splendour shone 
brightly, after burning the beautiful City of Lanka.

Seeing that city of Lanka burnt there, celestials, saints and great sages along with 
celestial's musicians, got a colossal surprise.

Seeing that Hanuma, the foremost among the monkeys and a mighty monkey, all the created 
beings were frightened, thinking of him as a fire that is to destroy the world.

There, all the celestial musicians, Vidyadharas the supernatural beings, Nagas the celestial 
serpents, Yakshas the spirits and all great living beings attained a great joy.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thereafter, having offered his salutation to Seetha, who was present at the foot of Ashoka 
tree, Hanuma spoke: "Thank heaven! I am seeing you uninjured here!"

Then, beholding again and again, that Hanuma, who had made ready for his return journey, 
Seetha spoke the following words, filled with affection towards her husband.

"O Hanuma, the annihilator of enemies! You are yourself surely sufficient single-handed 
completion of this task. Your elevated energy is creditable indeed.

"But, it will be appropriate for Rama, who destroys the hostile forces, to take me with 
him, after routing Lanka with his arrows."

"Therefore, you act in such a way that the high-souled Rama, valiant in battle, may exhibit 
prowess worthy of him."

Hearing those humble, reasonable and meaningful words of Seetha, Hanuma spoke the following 
words in reply.

"Rama, accompanied by the leaders of monkeys and bears, will come soon and after conquering 
the enemies in battle, will take away your grief."

Hanuma, the son of wind-god, thus consoling Seetha and making up his mind to go, saluted 
Seetha with reverence.

Thereafter, that Hanuma the foremost among the monkeys, and the annihilator of enemies, 
with an anxious desire to see his lord, ascended the Mount Arishta of excellence.

That mountain was covered as it were with dark green rows of gardens inhabited by towery 
elephants with red spots on their skin and with its clouds hanging between its summits, as with an upper 
garment.

By metals scattered here and there, looking like eyes drawing up the eye-lids, the mountain 
looked like being awakened, as it were, with love by the bright rays of the sun.

The mountain looked resembling the one which has started reciting the scriptures clearly 
in the form of the deep sound of running streams of water, singing as it were at a high pitch, in the 
form of roaring sound of various cascades.

The mountain stood as it were with uplifted arms in the form of very lofty deodars and 
which started crying loudly as it were, on all sides, in the form of the sound of its cascades.

The mountain seemed to be trembling in the form of waving dark automnal groves, which 
was piping as it were, in the form of hollow bamboos shaken up by the wind and whistling.

The mountain was hissing as it were with fury, in the form of its terrible and most poisonous 
snakes and which sat absorbed in meditation as it were, in the form of its deep caves covered with mist.

The mountain seems to be setting out on a journey on all four sides, with feet of the 
mountain, looking like rising clouds, which with its peaks having a lining of clouds, seemed to stretch 
its limbs in the sky.

The mountain was embellished with a number of summits and adorned with numerous caves 
scattered at many places and endowed with many sal, palmyrah, karna and bamboo trees.

The mountain was adorned with clusters of creepers having plenty of flowers, filled with 
a number of summits and adorned with numerous caves scattered at many places and endowed with many sal, 
palmyrah, karna and bamboo trees.

The mountain was endowed with many cascades, crowded together with heaps of rocks and 
frequented by great sages, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and celestial serpents.

The mountain was exquisite with creepers and trees, having caves inhabited by lions, 
spread over with a number of tigers and endowed with sweet roots and fruit-trees.

Hanuma, the son of wind-god, in a hurry to see Rama, ascended that mountain, excited 
as he was with an extreme joy.

Then, the rocks in the charming table-land of the mountain, on which the soles of Hanuma 
lied heavily, were crushed with noise and fallen to pieces.

Desirous of reaching the northern shore from the southern shore of that ocean, Hanuma 
ascended that mountain and enlarged his body.

Then, the valiant Hanuma after ascending the mountain, saw the terrific ocean inhabited 
by fishes and water-snakes.

Hanuma, the foremost among the monkeys and the son of the wind-god, entered the sky towards 
northern direction, like a wind, from southern direction.

Pressed at that moment by Hanuma, that excellent mountain sank into the bowels of the 
earth along with the various living beings and made a noise with its shaking summits and toppling trees.

Shaken by the impetus of the thighs of Hanuma, trees in blossom were broken and fell 
down on earth, as though struck by a thunder-bolt.

When the lions of great prowess dwelling in the midst of caves were tormented and roared 
terribly, that roaring noise was heard as it was piercing the sky.

The females of Vidyadhara class of supernatural beings, with their raiments in disorder 
through fear and their ornaments fallen off, went up all of a sudden from the mountain.

Large poisonous serpents of immense size, possessing vigour and having fiery tongues 
with their hoods and necks severely pressed lay coiled.

Then, leaving that tormented mountain of excellence; Kinnaras, Nagas, Gadharvas, Yakshas 
and Vidyadharas ascended to the sky.

Pressed down by that strong Hanuma, that beautiful mountain having its elevated summits 
crowned with trees, entered the bowels of the earth.

That mountain, with a width of ten yojanas (or eighty miles) and a height of thirty yojanas 
(or two hundred and forty miles) got level with the earth.

With a desire to cross easily the terrific ocean, whose shores were being lashed by its 
waves, which Hanuma jumped up into the air.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing the words of Sugreeva, Dadhimukha the monkey was pleased and offered his salutation 
with reverence to Rama, Lakshmana

After offering salutation to Sugreeva and to the mighty Rama and Lakshmana, that Dadhimukha 
accompanied by his valiant monkeys, sprang into the air.

That Dadhimukha, after entering Madhuvana, saw all the chiefs of monkeys, who were free 
from their intoxication, having passed off the honey and who were inwardly excited.

With his hands joined together for salutation, that valiant Dadhimukha approached them 
and cheerfully spoke the following gentle words to Angada.

"O gentle sir! Due to their ignorance, these guards in anger obstructed you to enter 
the grove. No resentment should be harboured by you about this obstruction."

"O exceedingly strong Angada! You are the prince and also the master of this grove. We 
have done a mistake

"O faultless Angada! After going there, I indeed informed your uncle about the arrival 
of all these monkeys here."

"Hearing your arrival along with these leaders of monkeys, your uncle was exceedingly 
pleased. Even after hearing of Madhuvana having been attacked, he did not develop any anger."

"Sugreeva, your uncle, the lord of monkeys and the king was pleased and told me, 'send 
all the monkeys here'."

Hearing these smooth words of Dadhimukha, the eloquent Angada, the foremost among the 
monkeys, spoke to those monkeys as follows:

"O the foremost of monkeys, the tormentators of enemies! I assume that Rama might have 
heard the news (of our arrival). Hence, it is not proper for us to remain here any longer, now that 
our work has been accomplished."

"The monkeys are taking, rest, after drinking the honey to their heart's content. What 
is there remaining, except to go to the place where Sugreeva my uncle is there?"

"I shall do whatever all the leaders of monkeys together tell me. I am obedient to you, 
in the matter of what ought to be done."

"I am not the master to command you, eventhough I am the crown prince. It is not befitting 
for me to play the lord over you, who have accomplished the task."

Hearing the indeclinable words spoken thus by Angada, the monkeys with their pleased 
minds, spoke to him (as follows:

"O prince, the foremost of monkeys! Who would speak like this, while he is the lord? 
Every one indeed thinks one's supremacy with an excited arrogance and says 'I, I'."

"It is so worthy of you alone that you have spoken such words. None else can utter like 
this. Your humility itself is telling of your future suitableness for prosperity."

"All of us, who reached here, are waiting for the right moment to go to that place where 
Sugreeva, the imperishable king of the heroic monkeys, is."

"O the excellent of monkeys! Without your command, it is not possible for the monkeys 
anywhere, even a step forward. We are speaking this truth to you."

While they were thus speaking; Angada replied, "Let us go." The mighty monkeys then sprang 
into the air.

All those leaders of monkey-troops, like stones shot from a catapult, making the space 
space-less, followed Angada, who was springing forward.

Those monkeys with speed, sounding forth a loud noise, sprang into the sky, like clouds 
driven by the wind.

Even before Angada landed there, Sugreeva, the king of monkeys spoke to the louts-eyed 
Rama, who was afflicted with grief (as follows):

"Be pacified! Happiness to you! The princess has been seen. There is not doubt. When 
the time earlier fixed by us exceeds beyond limit, it is not possible for them to come here."

"Angada, the long-armed prince and the most excellent of monkeys does not make his appearance 
before my vicinity, if the work is ruined."

"Even if such an exploit may be possible by these monkeys who have not been able to accomplish 
their work, Angada would have worn a sad face and felt perplexed and scattered in mind."

"If Angada the lord f the monkeys is not rejoiced, he would not have damaged my madhuvana, 
which belongs to my father and grandfather as well as protected by my forbears. Get consoled well, O 
virtuous Rama, the splendid son of Kausalya!"

"Seetha was seen. There is no doubt. None other than Hanuma must have seen Seetha. There 
is indeed none other than Hanuma, who is the executor."

"O Rama, having a very good understanding! In Hanuma, qualities like capacity to accomplish 
any object, intelligence, strenuous effort and vigour are unchangeable, like a splendour in the sun."

"Where Jambavan is a leader; Angada as the commander of troops and moreover Hanuma as 
the administer, the progress of that work cannot be as otherwise."

"O Rama, of unlimited prowess! Do not encounter troubled thoughts now!" Meanwhile, when 
the monkeys, who are proud of Hanuma's performance and who are making noise as though they are proclaiming 
about the accomplishment of their act are approaching Kishkindha Sugreeva heard certain sounds expressing 
joy, in the vicinity of the sky."

Then, hearing that clamour of the monkeys, Sugreeva the chief of the monkeys became rejoiced 
at heart, duly stretching and curling up his tail (in joy).

Keeping Angada and Hanuma in front of them, those monkeys too arrived with their eagerness 
to see Rama.

Those heroes, having Angada as their chief, exceedingly pleased as they were and filled 
with joy, landed at the vicinity of Sugreeva and Rama.

Thereafter, the mighty armed Hanuma, offering his salutation in bending his head low, 
informed Rama that Seetha the princess is constant in devotion to Rama and sound in body.

Hearing the nectar-like words, saying "Seetha was found" from the mouth of Hanuma, Rama 
and Lakshmana felt happy.

Thereupon, Lakshmana with love looked with reverence on the joyful Sugreeva, who earlier 
decidedly apprised about the aforesaid Hanuma, having accomplished the task.

Rama, the annihilator of hostile heroes, who obtained a great joy, looked on Hanuma with 
a high esteem.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thus spoken to by Seetha, ogresses swooned with anger terribly. Some went to tell that to Ravana 
the evil minded one.

Therafter ogresses with a terrible appearance neared Seetha and ten agin spoke words of evil purpose, 
with a single meaning and which were harsh.

"O ignoble one! O one with a sinful resolve! O Seetha! Today at this moment ogreeses will eat this 
your flesh according to comfort."

Then, seeing Seetha frightened by those evil ones, an ogress named Trijata, sleeping till then, 
spoke these words.

"O evil ones! Eat your selves. You will not eat Seetha who is the dear daughter of king Janaka 
and daughter-in-law of king Dasaratha."

"Now a dream which is terrible, causing the hairs to stand erect for the destruction of ogres and 
for the welfare of Her husband, has been seen by me."

Thus spoken to by Trijata all ogresses were frightened and spoke to that Trijata these words.

"Of what kind is this dream seen by you. Tell us". Listening to this utterance that came forth 
from the mouths of those ogresses, Trijata spoke at that time this word relating to the dream.

"Rama wearing white garlands and clothes passing through the sky, Himself ascending a palanquin 
made of ivory tied with a thousand swans, arrived along with Lakshmana."

"Now it has been seen by me in the dream that Seetha also wearing white clothes was sitting on 
a white mountain surrounded by the ocean."

"Seetha came together with Rama like the light with the Sun. Rama also was seen by me to be mounted 
on a great elephant with four tusks and equalling a mountain and Rama wandered together with Lakshmana."

"Thereafter shining with their own radiance, wearing white garlands and clothes, those two best 
among men Rama and Laksmana neared Seetha."

"Thereafter Seetha rested on the upper part of back of elephant in the sky; taken by Her husband 
Rama to the front of that mountain."

"Thereafter it has been seen by me that Seetha with eyes like lotuses has risen up from the lap 
of Her husband and gently touched the Moon and the Sun with Her hand."

"Thereafter that best elephant ascended by those princes Rama and Lakshmana and by Seetha with 
wide eyes stood on the top of Lanka."

"Rama together with wife Seetha, Himself came here in a chariot tied with eight white bulls."

"The valorous best among men Rama together with brother Lakshmana and with Seetha ascended wonderful 
Pushpaka aeroplane equalling the Sun, went in the northern direction."

"Rama with strength equalling that of Lord Vishnu, born in Raghu's dynasty together with brother 
Lakshmana and with Seetha has been seen by me thus in the dream."

"Rama with great glory is not possible to be defeated by Suras or by ogres or by others like heaven 
not being conquerable by sinners."

"Ravana also was seen by me on earth sprinkled with oil, with red clothes, with garlands tied with 
Oleander flowers, drinking oil and intoxicated."

"Now Ravana fallen down on to earth from Pushpaka aeroplane having the head shaved, wearing black 
clothes again was seen to be pulled by a woman."

"Wearing red garlands and unguents, drinking oil, laughing, dancing, with a confused mind, with 
agitated senses, Ravana went by a chariot tied by donkeys."

"Undertaking southern direction, Ravana went quickly by a donkey.Again it was seen by me that the 
king of ogres Ravana stupefied with fear, fell down from the donkey with head down."

"That Ravana rising up quickly, together with perplexity, distressed with fear, excited by passion, 
being naked, like a mad man, prattling many bad words, entering dirt with a bad smell, which was intolerable, 
horrible, dark, like the hell and quickly sank in that."

"A woman with red clothes, who was black, with body smeared with dirt, tying Ravana by the throat, 
was pulling hiim in southern direction."

"In that dream the ogre Kumbhakarna has been seen thus by me. All Ravana's sons have been seen 
to be sprinkled with oil."

"Ravana by a pig, Indrajit by a porpoise, Kumbhakarna by a camel set out in southern direction."

"Among those Vibhishana is the only one who has been seen by me to be having a white umbrella, 
wearing white garlands and clothes and anointing body with white unguents."

"Vibhishana is there adorned with the sound of conch shells and kettledrums, with dances and songs, 
ascended a best elephant equalling a mountain with the sound of a thundering cloud, with four tusks. He approached 
the sky together with four ministers"

"An assembly also of ogres drinking oil and wearing red garlands, with red clothes, with the sound 
of songs and musical instruments has been seen by me."

"This beautiful city of Lanka has also been seen together with horses and elephants with broken 
gates and arches fallen down in the ocean."

"Lanka protected by Ravana has been seen by me in the dream to be burnt by a quick Vanara who is 
a messenger of Rama."

"In Lanka horrible with ash, all ogresses were drinking oil, laughing heartily with a great noise 
and also dancing a lot."

"All these best among ogres such as Kumbhakarna and others taking a red cloth entered a hole filled 
with cow dung."

"Go away! Be destroyed! Rama will get Seetha. With a great anger He will get you killed together 
with other ogres."

"Rama will not approve frightening ot threatening His dear wife who is highly valued by Him, who 
followed Him to live in the forest."

"For that reason, enough of cruel words. Gentle words indeed be said. Let us request Seetha. This 
is agreeable to me."

"Which woman while being sorrowful, such type of dream has been seen, that woman being released 
from various sorrows, will get unsurpassed pleasure."

"O ogresses! Entreat Seetha who has been frightened. What is the use with a desire to speak. From 
Rama a horrible fear has come to ogres."

"O ogresses! This Seetha daughter of Janaka, pleased with prostration is competent to protect us 
from great danger. And also I do not see in Her who is wide eyed, in Her limbs even a minute misshapen characteristic, 
even insignificant one."

"I see an imperfection in complexion alone. I doubt that this princess who came near an aeroplane 
in my dream, who is not suited to sorrows received sorrow."

"I am seeing Seetha coming near accomplishment of motive. I also see the destruction of Ravana 
also and victory of Rama coming near."

"Being a cause to listen to a great pleasure of Her, this throbbing eye long like a lotus petal 
is being seen my me."

"One left arm of this strightforward Seetha suddenly has become erect and is slightly trembling."

"Seetha's best left thigh equal to an elephant's trunk is trembling indicating Rama's standing 
in front of Her."

"A bird also entering its dwelling place on a branch again and again speaking best consolating 
words, is telling heartily welcoming words being delighted again and again, as though impelling Seetha."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Seeing the city of Lanka blazing, and frightened with its multitude of demons getting 
alarmed, Hanuma the monkey became thoughtful.

A great anxiety entered his mind and there arose in him a feeling of self-contempt. He 
said to himself "What an admonitory act has bee done by me in burning Lanka."

"As a burning fire is extinguished with water, blessed indeed are those great-souled 
men of excellence, who in their wisdom, restrain their elevated fury."

"Which enraged man would not incur a sinful act? An enraged person may even kill his 
elders. An enraged person may insult virtuous men with harsh words."

"An agitated person ever does not know which appropriate words are and which are forbidden 
words to be uttered. For enraged persons, there is neither an improper act nor ever an improper word 
to be spoken."

"As a serpent casts off its slough, whoever casts aside an intense anger sprung up in 
him suddenly by virtue of his endurance, he verily is said to be an excellent man."

"Shame be upon me, the greatest sinner with utter foolishness and impudence, who became 
a fire-brand without giving thought to that Seetha and became hurtful to my master."

"If this whole Lanka for its part has been burnt, the worshipful Seetha too has surely 
been burnt. Thus, I have spolt the purpose of my lord inadvertently."

"That purpose for which all this effort was taken, has been spoilt. At the time of burning 
the city, I have not saved Seetha indeed."

"This task (of burning Lanka) has been fulfilled by me and it has been completed only 
with a small effort. Overpowered as I was with anger, the very root of that fulfillment has been destroyed 
by me. There is no doubt."

"The entire Lanka has been reduced to ashes. No place is seen unburnt in this City. Therefore, 
Seetha also must have been surely lost."

"If this task has been spoiled due to my perverted intelligence, it is appropriate even 
for me, here and now itself, to give up my life."

"Shall I jump into fire now or into the mouth of a submarine fire? Or shall I give up 
my body as a feed to the marine animals?"

"By me who has ruined the entire task, how can I, even while remaining alive, see Sugreeva 
the Lord of monkeys or Rama and Lakshmana the best of men?"

"Due to culpability of my anger, I have indeed shown this apishness that is famous for 
instability in the three worlds."

"Let there be shame upon the passionate way of my thinking, which breeds helplessness 
and instability. fir, eventhough capable as I am, Seetha could not be saved by me due to my exciting 
passion of anger."

"If Seetha dies, those two princes, Rama and Lakshmana will die. If their death occurs, 
Sugreeva along with his associates will also die."

"How can the virtuous Bharata together with Shatrughna, who are affectionate to his brother, 
survive after hearing this news?"

"When the virtuous Ikshvaku dynasty perishes, all the people will undoubtedly be tormented 
with anguish and affliction."

"Therefore, I, the unfortunate being, deprived of the values of duty and interest, with 
my mind filled with culpability of anger, clearly became the destroyer of the world."

While thinking thus, Hanuma clearly saw some omens, whose welcome-results had already 
been directly experienced by him and again thought (as follows);

"Or else, Seetha the auspicious lady, who is completely charming of her limbs and protected 
by her own effulgence, does not get destroyed. Fire does not indeed destroy fire!"

"If this fire with its burning nature is not igniting me, it is surely due to the power 
of Rama and the benevolence of Seetha."

"How should that Seetha, who is a godhead for the three brothers (of Rama) starting with 
Bharata and who is dear to the heart of Rama perish?"

"This fire, which spreads everywhere without any hindrance, is not burning my tail. How 
can it burn the venerable Seetha?"

Hanuma then recalled with wonder the sight of Mount Mainaka (having gold in its cavities) 
in the midst of sea-water there.

"That Seetha can even burn away the fire by her penance, true utterances and undivided 
devotion towards her husband. Fire does not ignite her."

Hanuma, who was thus thinking there about the overpowering virtue of Seetha, happened 
to hear the words of the high-souled charanas (heavenly bards).

"Alas! Hanuma, who hurled a very terrific fire into Ravana's house, has indeed done a 
difficult act."

"The city of Lanka, full of demons their wives, children and elders running hither and 
thither, as also filled with an uproar of people, appears as if it weeping through its mountain-caves."

"It is just so surprising a marvel to us that the entire City with its market-places, 
ramparts and arched door-ways, was burnt, but Seetha alone was not burnt."

That Hanuma became delighted in his mind, by seeing the omens, with their apparent advantages 
in them and very high qualities of their origin as also the words of those sages.

Then, Hanuma, having fulfilled his object of desire by learning that Seetha the princess 
remains uninjured, made up his mind to return only after seeing her personally yet again.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing the words of the high-souled Rama, Hanuma reported to Rama, all the words spoken 
by Seetha.

"O Rama the foremost of men! Seetha, the princess, spoke a detailed account of an event 
which occurred long ago in Mount Chitrakuta, as a token of recollection."

"Seetha, who slept happily by your side (at one instance) got up before you. A crow coming 
down quickly, tore her flesh at an area in the midst of her breasts (with its beak)."

"O Rama! You slept in your turn on the lap of the princess. That crow again began to 
torment the princess."

"Coming near again and again, it tore her breast severely. Dampened by her blood, you 
then were awakened by her."

"O tormentator of enemies! Though lying happily asleep, you were awakened by Seetha the 
princess, who was being ceaselessly tormented by the crow."

"O long-armed Rama! Seeing her, who was lacerated at the midst of her breasts, you were 
enraged like a hissing snake and spoke to her as follows."

" 'O bashful Seetha! By whom was the middle of your breasts lacerated with nail-points? 
Who is playing with an angry five-hooded serpent?"

"Looking around, you suddenly saw a crow, which perched in front of Seetha, with its 
sharp nails stained with blood."

"That crow, foremost of the birds was indeed the son of Indra the lord of celestials; 
dwelling in the middle of the mountains and equal in speed to the wind."

"O great armed Rama, the excellent among the wise! With your eyes rolling with anger, 
you then harboured a cruel intention against that crow."

"Taking a blade of grass from your bed of the sacred grass, you charged it with the potency 
of Brahma missile. That flaming blade blazed forth like the fire of universal dissolution, with its 
end facing the bird."

"You hurled that flaming blade of grass towards the crow. Then that flaming blade of 
grass for its part followed the crow."

"Forsaken by all the celestials, Indra, its father and the sages too, that crow did not 
find a protector even after going round all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the lower regions)."

"O destroyer of enemies! Being frightened the crow came to your presence once again and 
sough your protection. Though fit to be killed, you on your part, affording shelter, in mercy to the 
crow, protected that crow which had fallen flat on the ground."

'O Rama! Since it is not possible to make the missile a waste, you destroyed the right 
eye of the crow."

"O Rama! Then, that crow, having been discharged by you, went back to its own habitation, 
after offering salutation to you and to king Dasaratha."

"O Rama! Why are you not employing the same type of a missile on the demons, though you 
are the foremost among the wielders of missiles, though courageous and possessed of good disposition?"

"Neither the Nagas the celestials serpents nor even Gandharvas the celestial musicians 
nor the demons nor the troop of Maruts the host of gods, nor all of them joined together are capable 
of fighting with Rama."

"If that powerful Rama is eager to save me, let him kill Ravana in battle quickly with 
his exceptionally sharp arrows."

"Why even that Lakshmana, the annihilator of adversaries and the foremost of men born 
in Raghu dynasty is not saving me, by taking orders from Rama his brother?"

"Wherefore those two competent brothers Rama and Lakshmana, with their splendour equal 
to that of air and fire, and excellent among men, even though they can conquer the celestials, are ignoring 
me?"

"There is no doubt that I had done some big impure act, for which reason those two brothers 
Rama and Lakshmana, who torment the enemies, even though capable, are not paying attention to me."

Hearing the miserable words of Seetha spoken with tears, I again spoke to that venerable 
Seetha the following words:

" 'O Seetha the princess! Rama has grown indifferent because of grief born of separation 
from you. I swear it to you truly. Rama, being overwhelmed with grief, Lakshmana too is feeling pain."

" 'O faultless one! You can give now, a token of recollection, which Rama can recognize 
and which can beget happiness to him."

" 'Those two princes, the foremost among men and the faultless ones are eager to see 
you. They can reduce Lanka to ashes'."

" 'O lady with charming hips! Killing the terrific Ravana together with his relatives 
in battle, Rama will certainly take you to his City of Ayodhya'."

" 'O faultless one! You can give now, a token of recollection, which Rama can recognize 
and which can beget happiness to him."

"O mighty Rama! Having surveyed all the directions and having untied from the end of 
her garment, this excellent jewel which was being strung together in her hair that Seetha gave it to 
me."

"O Rama! Taking that wonderful jewel for your sake from her, and offering my salutation 
by bowing my head to that venerable Seetha, I was seized with a haste to come back."

"Seeing me who was in a hurry to come back and augmenting my body abundantly, Seetha 
having a beautiful complexion spoke to me."

"With her eyes filled with tears, looking miserable, with her words ambiguously coming 
out of her coked throat, bewildered as she was, at the though of my flying away and afflicted with a 
gush of grief; (she spoke to me as follows):

"O Hanuma! Inquire those two brothers Rama and Lakshmana looking like lions, Sugreeva 
together with his ministers and all others about their welfare."

" 'You ought to clear up difficulties for that mighty armed Rama, so that he can help 
me to cross this ocean of sorrow. O best of heroes among monkeys! Approaching Rama, tell this horrible 
gush of my grief and the threats of these female-demons. Have a happy journey!' "O illustrious princes, 
the protector of men! The venerable Seetha filled with sorrow spoke these words to be conveyed to you. 
Comprehending this matter spoken by me, believe that Seetha is completely safe."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hanuma, like a bull among the monkeys and the foremost among them spoke to them as follows: 
"Cherish the honey with a cool mind, O monkeys! I will keep off your opposer who is standing in your 
way."

Hearing the words of Hanuma, the gracious minded Angada the principal among the monkeys 
repeated the words: "Let the monkeys drink the honey."

"The words, though improper of Hanuma who had accomplished his task, are to be obliged 
certainly by me. Wherefore then, moreover, on such an occasion?"

Hearing the words coming from the mouth of Angada, those monkeys who were like bulls 
among the monkeys were delighted and answered with reverence, saying 'good, good!'

Reverencing Angada the foremost among the monkeys, all the monkeys rushed towards Madhuvana, 
the grove abounding in honey, like the rush of a river towards a tree.

Because Hanuma had seen Seetha and others had heard of her and because of the grant of 
permission from Angada, all those gifted monkeys entered Madhuvana the grove, overpowered the guards 
with their prowess, drank honey and the partook juicy fruits there.

Then, all those monkeys jumped on the guards of the grove, who came there in hundreds 
together and banged them.

All those monkeys together took vessels of honey in their arms and drank them. Some others 
banged those who obstructed them.

Some monkeys, with their skin-colour as yellow as honey, after drinking vessels of honey, 
also threw some honey away. Some others, with the remnant of honey in their arms, after drinking, whipped 
up one another with their excessive intoxication.

Some others, seizing a branch of a tree, stood rooted at the foot of a tree. Some, who 
were highly intoxicated, laid down spreading leaves on the ground.

Those monkeys, who were intoxicated by drinking the honey, became inebriated and started 
pushing one another cheerfully and some others began to stumble.

Some were roaring like lions. Some, with joy, whistled like birds. Some monkeys, inebriated 
as they were by drinking honey, simply slept on the floor.

Doing something or other, some were laughing. Some others were doing something else. 
Some were telling what they were doing, while some others were understanding some things else.

The honey-keepers, who were there as messengers of Dadhimukha in that Madhuvana, were 
warded off by the terrific monkeys and they fled to different directions.

Dragged by their knees and tossed up in the air by the monkeys, those honey-keepers were 
very much depressed, went to Dadhimukha and complained as follows:

"The monkeys, as permitted by Hanuma, violently destroyed Madhuvana. We were dragged 
by our knees and further tossed up in the air."

Hearing that Madhuvana was damaged, Dadhimukha, the grove-protector there was enraged 
and thereafter consoled those monkeys (as follows):

"Come here let us go there and prevent by our force, the monkeys who are arrogant of 
their strength and are consuming the honey."

Hearing these words of Dadhimukha, the foremost of those monkeys who displayed their 
heroism, quickly went again to madhuvana along with him.

Grasping a tree, Dadhimukha speedily took up his position in the middle of those monkeys 
in Madhuvana. All his follower-monkeys also ran with him.

Those enraged monkeys, taking rocks, trees and even mountains, went to the place wehre 
those foremost of monkeys were there.

Those heroic monkeys, keeping the words of their master in mind, briskly ran with Sala 
trees, palm trees and rocks as their weapons.

Then, the valiant guards of the grove running in thousands invaded the monkeys who were 
on trees, at the foot of the trees and who were arrogant of their strength.

Seeing Dadhimukha coming with anger, Hanuma along with eminent monkeys ran towards him 
with speed.

The enraged Angada struck there with his arms, that long-armed Dadhimukha the maternal 
uncle his father, who was endowed with extraordinary might and who was rushing with speed with a tree 
in his hand.

Blinded with arrogance, that Angada did not show any mercy to him on the score of his 
being the maternal uncle of his father and caused him at once to fall down and began to crush him against 
the ground.

That Dadhimukha, the valiant elephant among the monkeys, who was afflicted with his broken 
arms, thighs and shoulders, drenched as he was in blood, lost his consciousness for a moment.

That Dadhimukha, Sugreeva's maternal uncle, quickly recovering his breath, was enraged 
and resisted those monkeys, who were highly intoxicated because of drinking of honey, by a proper reprimand.

Somehow released by those monkeys that Dadhimukha the foremost among the monkeys, went 
to a solitary place and spoke to his messengers who came there (as follows):

"Let these monkeys stay here. We will go to the place where the thick-necked Sugreeva, 
our lord of the monkeys stays together with Rama."

"I will make known to the king, all the misdeed of Angada. Hearing my words, the enraged 
king will get the monkeys killed."

"This Madhuvana is indeed cherished by our high-souled king, Sugreeva and it derived 
from his father and grand father. It is so charming, but is dangerous to be approached even by celestials."

"The longevity of these monkeys got reduced, as they were very much lustful of honey. 
That Sugreeva can get these monkeys together with their companions, killed as a matter of punishment."

"These evil-minded beings, who disregarded the royal command, are fit to be capitally 
punished. Our wrath, springing from our impatience, will indeed become fruitful."

Thus speaking to the garden-guards, the mighty Dadhimukha quickly springing up all at 
once, went (to Kishkindha) together with the garden-guards.

That Dadhimukha, the monkey, reached the place where that Sugreeva, the intelligent monkey 
was there, within an interval of only a moment.

Seeing Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva, Dadhimukha descended to a level ground, from the 
sky.

That Dadhimukha of a great prowess, the supreme lord of the guards, surrounded by all 
those garden-guards keeping a sad face, made a respectful salutation to Sugreeva with his head, by falling 
down and touching with his head, the auspicious feet of Sugreeva.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thereupon, the heroic monkeys like Angada and others as also Hanuma, the great one among 
the monkeys accepted the words of Jambavan.

Then, the excellent monkeys, resembling Meru and Mandara mountains, like elephants in 
rut, as if covering the sky, having huge bodies and colossal strength, keeping Hanuma in their front, 
leaving Mount Mahendra, went ahead leaping delightfully. They looked as though conducted by the mind's 
eyes of Hanuma, who is adored by living beings as having good stupendous swiftness, they having resolved 
to fulfill the purpose of Rama and to attain a great glory, having accomplished the purpose and duly 
determined to complete the task. All of them were looking up at narrating the previous pleasant tidings 
and taking delight in war. All of them, in high spirits, were judging rightly the vengeance of Rama 
against the evil-minded Ravana.

Then, those monkeys, leaping into the sky and floating in the air, reached a garden looking 
like Nandanavana the divine grove filled with trees and creepers.

They reached, that Madhuvana by name, the garden abounded with honey, which was protected 
grove, unapproachable for all and looking fascinated to the soul of all beings.

A very powerful monkey called Dadhimukha, who was a high-souled eminent monkey and the 
maternal uncle of Sugreeva always protected that garden.

Reaching that huge grove, which was very dear to the heart of Sugreeva, those monkeys 
became highly excessive in their behaviour.

Then, seeing that large Madhuvana, the garden abounded in honey, those monkeys, whose 
colour was as yellow as honey, were delighted and solicited Angada the prince for permission to taste 
the honey.

Thereupon, Angada the prince, taking approval from those elders like Jambavan and others, 
gave the monkeys a liberty to drink honey there.

Thereafter, all those monkeys, thus permitted to drink honey, were exceedingly pleased. 
Then, those excited monkeys felt glad and began dancing.

Some were singing. Some were offering salutations. Some were dancing. Some were laughing 
loudly. Some were falling down. Some were moving in different directions. Some were jumping up. Some 
were talking incoherently.

Some were leaning against one another. Some were falling upon one another. Some were 
disputing with one another. Some were playing with one another.

Some were running from one tree to another. Some were falling down to the ground from 
the tree-tops. Some, with a missile-like speed, were flying towards the tops of gigantic trees from 
the ground.

While one was singing, another approached him laughing. While one was laughing, another 
approached him weeping. While one was weeping, another approached him pushing. While one was pushing, 
another approached him roaring.

That army of monkeys, moving in excessively honey-drunken state, became highly excited. 
None in that army was not drunk. None in that army was not satiated.

Seeing that grove, being consumed and the trees stripped off their leaves and flowers 
the monkey named Dadhimukha (who was incharge of the grove) then angrily interrupted those monkeys.

Threatened by those monkeys who were behaving excessively, Dadhimukha who was endowed 
with a terrible energy, the care-taker of the grove and an elderly hero of the monkeys further contemplated 
the means to protect that grove from the monkeys.

He spoke harsh words with some and courageously struck some others with his palms uninterruptedly, 
created a quarrel by coming into collusion with some, and approached some in a conciliatory manner.

That Dadhimukha was dragged, after coming into collusion with him by those monkeys, who 
were being forcibly hindered by him, eventhough those monkeys overpowered him with unrestrained emotion 
arising out of their intoxication, those who had abandoned their fear disregarding any bad consequence 
of their act.

Bruising with their nails, biting with their teeth on account of their inebriety and 
making short work of that Dadhimukha with their palms and feet, all those moneys made that large grove, 
divested of its flowers, fruits and honey.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Seetha honoured Hanuma, who was ready to go, with good words. Hanuma, having gone to 
a distance from that place, thought within himself (as follows):

"I have seen this black-eyed Seetha. There is only a little that remains to be done by 
me. Abandoning the three strategies for success viz. sowing dissension, negotiation and bribery, I have 
to implement here the fourth strategy viz. open assault."

"In the case of demons, the strategy of negotiation is not practicable. For those persons 
having abundant wealth, the strategy of bribery is not suitable. For persons who are proud of their 
strength, the strategy of sowing dissension is not amenable. Prowess alone is agreeable for me here."

"Except showing of valour, no strategy in accomplishing this task is adequate in these 
circumstances, for the demons can adopt a weak attitude in the ensuring combat, if their foremost heroes 
are somehow killed here and now."

"He alone can accomplish his purpose, who implements many (secondary) tasks even after 
the initial task has been carried through, without impairing the previous achievement."

'There is indeed no single exclusive method to accomplish a purpose however small a task 
may be. On the other hand, whoever knows to do a task in many ways, he alone is capable of achieving 
that task."

'If I go to the abode of Sugreeva the Lord of monkeys, having ascertained the truth as 
to who will predominate in an encounter between the adversary and ourselves here itself, then will the 
command of my master have been carried out by me."

"How can my combat with the demons now will prove to be a happy one? And, how will my 
strength become fruitful? How indeed will that Ravana applaud me in battle?"

"Then meeting Ravana with his troop of ministers, his army and his followers in battle 
as well as knowing his designs and strength, I will go back from here happily."

"This excellent grove of this cruel Ravana, with its various kinds of trees and creepers, 
which is pleasing to the eyes and the mind, is looking like Nandana, Indra's paradise."

"I will destroy this grove like fire scorching a dried up forest. While this grove gets 
demolished, Ravana will then be angry."

"Thereupon Ravana will order for an army consisting of horses, great chariots and elephants 
and armed with weapons like great tridents and spears made of iron. Then, a great combat will follow."

"Attacking those demons of terrific prowess, I too with my unbearable prowess, will kill 
that army instigated by Ravana and return to the place of Sugreeva happily."

Thereafter, Hanuma of terrific prowess, getting angry, started then to throw away trees 
by a highly violent jerk of his thighs akin to the jerk of a wind.

Then, the valiant Hanuma laid waste the royal garden attached to the gynaecium resonant 
with cries of birds in heat and endowed with various kinds of trees and creepers.

Hanuma damaged trees in that grove, destroyed the ponds and crushed the tops of pleasure 
hills to powder. Thus, that grove became nasty at sight.

With its trees and creepers dried up, with the howls of various birds, with its ponds 
destroyed, with its copper-coloured sprouts dried up there, that grove did not look bright, as though 
it had been destroyed by a wild fire. Those creepers with their bars of support displaced, fell down 
like distressed woman.

"With its arbours and picture-galleries destroyed, its great serpents and wild animals 
emitting cries of distress, its grottos and other structures demolished, that grove became defaced.

"That woody land of that pleasure-garden which afforded shelter to the women-folk of 
Ravana and which has clusters of Ashoka creepers became a jumble of creepers of sorrow for the distressed 
women; by the violence of Hanuma."

Creating a great displeasure to the mind of that high-souled Ravana, the Lord of the 
land of Lanka; that Hanuma decided to fight alone against many mighty demons and stayed

undefined

undefined

undefined

Then, Hanuma with a terrific prowess, was enraged (at his capture and his being dragged) 
and saw Ravana with his red hot eyes. He was surprised by that deed of Indrajit.

Ravana was endowed with a great splendor and shone with a glittering and precious diadem 
of gold as also encircled with strings of pearls.

That Ravana was adorned with bright-coloured gold ornaments, inlaid with diamonds and 
decorated with worthy gems, which appeared as though they were prepared with the mind.

Ravana was attired in very costly silk and his body was smeared with red-sandal paste 
and well painted with various brightly coloured designs.

Ravana looked strange with his ten heads, having terrible-looking yet good-looking pair 
of red eyes each, with brilliant sharp enormous teeth and protruding lips, like a daring demon endowed 
with extra ordinary vigour, shining brightly as Mount Mandara with its peaks and infested with snakes 
of different varieties.

Ravana was having a pearl necklace casting its splendor on his bosom. He was looking 
like a mass of blue antimony, but with his countenance shining like the full moon and appearing like 
a cloud illumined by the rising sun.

Ravana was distinguished by (twenty) arms, adorned with bracelets, smeared with excellent 
sandal-paste and decked with shining Angadas another variety of bracelets and looking like large five-hooded 
serpents.

He was comfortably seated on a big excellent throne of crystal, rendered picturesque 
by being embedded with jewels and overspread with an exquisite covering.

He was duly waited upon at close quarters on all sides by young ladies, well-adorned 
and with whisks in their hands.

He was proud of his might and had four counselors sitting nearby, all belonging to the 
demonical race and who knew the secret of good counsel, viz. Durdhara, Prahasta, Mahaparshva the demon 
and the counselor Nikumbha and looked like the entire terrestrial globe enclosed by four oceans.

He was being reassured by counselors knowing the secret of good counsel and other demons 
with auspicious minds, as Indra the lord of celestials is reassured by celestials.

Hanuma saw Ravana with a great splendor, sitting on the throne, looking like a rainy 
cloud on the peak of Mount Meru.

Though tortured by the demons that Hanuma, of terrific prowess, experiencing a great 
surprise, looked attentively at Ravana.

Seeing the glittering Ravana, the king of demons, Hanuma was bewildered by his splendor 
and thought in his mind as follows:

"What figure, what courage, what strength, what splendor and what amalgam of auspicious 
marks, alas, this king of demons has!"

"Had this lord of demons perhaps not strong in unrighteousness, he would have been a 
protector of even the world of celestials together with Indra the lord of celestials."

"By his cruel and violent acts despised by the world, all people including gods and demons 
indeed remain frightened of him. If enraged he is indeed capable to turn the entire world into a single 
ocean."

Seeing the power of Ravana the king of demons, who possessed an unlimited vigour, the 
intelligent Hanuma formulated many kinds of thoughts in this way.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Jambumali, the demon with great tusks, wielding a bow, donning crimson garlands and clothes, 
wearing beautiful chaplet and charming ear-rings, possessing a gigantic body, having round and open 
eyes, the demon causing diseases, unconquerable in battle, a strong demon and the son of Prahasta, commanded 
by Ravana, started stretching with rashness his big bow resembling a rain bow garnished splendorous 
arrows and which brilliance was similar to that of a lightening and produced a sound like that of a 
thunder.

The tumultuous sound created out of the twanging of that bow, soon filled up the quarters, 
intermediate points and the sky.

Seeing him, arriving by a chariot yoked with donkeys, that Hanuma who was endowed with 
swiftness, was thrilled with joy and made a noise too.

The long-armed Jambumali transfixed sharp arrows into that great monkey, Hanuma who was 
standing on the top of the archy door-way.

He transfixed Hanuma the leader of monkeys in the face with an arrow with a crescent-shaped 
head, on the head with an arrow having an ear-shaped top and in the arms with ten steel arrows.

That crimson face of Hanuma, hit by an arrow, shone like a full-blown lotus touched by 
a sun's ray in autumn.

That face of Hanuma, which was naturally crimson in colour, smeared with blood, beamed 
like a large lotus in the sky sprinkled with drops of sandal.

Hanuma, struck by those arrows, was enraged with that demon and then saw by his side, 
a big rock of a very large measure.

Uplifting that rock with strength, the athletic Hanuma hurled it with force. The enraged 
demon then struck back that rock with ten arrows.

Seeing that work in vain, the powerful Hanuma of terrific prowess, uprooted a very large 
sal tree and whirled it around.

Seeing the mighty Hanuma, whirling around the sal tree, the exceedingly strong Jambumali 
discharged numerous arrows.

He splitted sal tree with four arrows and struck the arms of Hanuma with five arrows, 
in the chest with one arrow and in the space between the breast wit ten arrows.

Hanuma, with his body full of arrows, was highly enraged and taking the same iron rod 
as well as clasping it swiftly, whirled it around.

Spinning the iron rod with a great speed, Hanuma, richly endowed with strength and highly 
agitated, threw it on the broad chest of Jamubumali.

That Jambumali's head was not there, nor his arms, nor his knees, nor his bow, nor his 
chariot and nor his horses were seen nor his arrows.

Thus struck by Hanuma, the mighty Jambumali, with his limbs and ornaments crushed to 
powder, was instantly killed and fell dead on the ground.

Hearing Jambumali having been killed, as also the mighty Kimkaras, Ravana was angry with 
his red enraged eyes.

Since the mighty son of Prahasta was killed, that Ravana rolling his red eyes with rage, 
immediately ordered the sons of ministers possessing high strength and prowess, to go to the battle.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing those words of Seetha, the eloquent Hanuma was very much pleased and spoke to 
Seetha (as follows):

"O Seetha, the beautiful princess! Whatever you spoke is befitting. It is in keeping 
with woman's nature and humility of a chaste women."

"It is indeed not fit for a woman to mount on my back and traverse an extensive ocean, 
which is having a width of one hundred yojanas."

"O Seetha endowed with modesty! The second reason you mentioned that you would not be 
touching any one else other then Rama is befitting of you, the wife of that high soled Rama. O princess! 
which other lady except you can speak of such sweet words?"

"O princess! I can completely inform Rama of all that you have done and of all that you 
have spoken before me."

"O princess! All this was told by me because of several reasons, being desirous of doing 
good to Rama ad with my mind moistened with affection towards him."

"I spoke this because of the unassailability of Lanka, its great ocean so difficult to 
be crossed and also my capacity of taking you."

"Because of my great affection and devotion towards you, I wish to carry you well now 
itself to Rama your hushand. These words were not spoken by me with any other motive."

"O faultless Seetha! If you are not willing to go with me, give me a token of remembrance 
which Rama can recognise."

Hearing Hanuma's words, Seetha like the daughter of a god, slowly spoke the following 
words, strung together with alphabets of tears: "You tell this (following) excellent thing as a token 
of remembrance to my beloved husband."

"There is a place inhabited by sages at a hillock in the north-eastern It was bountiful 
with roots fruits and water. In that place, while we were residing in a hermitage of sages, on a day 
long ago, we were strolling in water in parts of groves with various kinds of flowers of perfume in 
that hillock. Your thereupon became wet and sat at my proximity."

"Then, a crow, yearning for meat, began to peck me. Picking up a clod of earth, I prevented 
the crow from its act."

"Pecking me again and again, the crow was hiding there only. That crow, yearning for 
food, did not resig from meat."

"While I was angry with that bird, my skirt was slipping and I was pulling its string 
(so as to tighten it). I was seen by you then."

"Moved by anger, I felt abashed for being laughed at by you. Torn down by the crow, which 
was yearning for food, I sought shelter with you."

"Feeling tired, I again settled on your lap. As though angry, I was consoled by you and 
I was fully delighted."

"Slowly wiping my eyes, my face filled with tears, I was seen by you, O Lord, as having 
been annoyed by the crow."

"I even slept for a long time on Rama's lap because of my fatigue. In his turn, Rama 
the elder brother of Bharata, slept in my arms."

"Meanwhile, the same crow appeared there. Descending all of a sudden, the crow clawed 
me at the space between the breasts, even as I awoke from my sleep and rose from the lap of Rama. Flying 
up again, it tore me up a lot."

"Then, Rama got wet by the discharged drops of blood. Thereafter, that splendorous Rama, 
the annihilator of enemies, who was in a pleasant slumber, was woken up by that crow and by me who was 
grievously tormented by the crow."

"That long-armed Rama, seeing me pierced violently on the breasts, then spoke the following 
words, hissing like an angry serpant.

"O Seetha the round-thighed woman! Who has wounded the space between your breasts? who 
is playing with a fire-faced serpent filled with fury?"

'Then, throwing a glance around, Rama saw that crow with its sharp claws moistened iwth 
blood and sitting in front of me alone."

"That crow, the best among birds, seems to be the son of Indra the Lord of celestials, 
staying in mountains and moving with a peed equal to the wind."

"Then, the long-armed Rama, the best among wise men, swirling his eyes in anger, made 
a resolve in the matter of that ferocious crow."

"Taking a blade of Kusa grass from his bed ( made of Kusa grass), Rama employed it to 
work with Brahma's missile (a mythical weapon which deals with infallible destruction). That blazing 
shoot of grass, resembling a fire destroying the world, flared up in front of that bird."

"As Rama threw that blazing blade of Kusa grass towards that crow, that blade of grass 
went chasing that crow in the sky."

"Then, while that blade of grass came chasing, that crow went flying in many a way. Seeking 
protection, it roamed all over the world."

"Roaming the three worlds in search of a saviour, that crow was abandoned by Indra; its 
father, the celestials and the sages. Finally, it sought refuge in the same Rama."

"That Rama, who affords protection, was compassionate and protected that crow, which 
fell on the ground (in salutation to Rama) and sought for protection, eventhough it was apt to be killed."

"Seeing that crow, coming exhausted and dejected, Rama said to it: 'It is not possible 
to make Brahma missile a waste. For this reason, tell me what to do now."

Thereafter, that crow said "Let your arrow shoot my right eye." Then that blade of Kusa 
grass shooted the right eye of that crow. By giving away its right eye in that way, the crow saved its 
life."

"After offering salutations to Rama and King Dasaratha and being discharged by that valiant 
Rama, the crow returned to its own abode."

"O lord of the earth! For my sake you hurled a Brahma's missile even at a crow. Why are 
you forgiving the one who has taken me away from you?"

"O Rama the best among men! You, with great strength, annihilate the enemy and bestow 
your mercy on me. O Lord! She who has a protector in you, actually looks like one without any protector."

"You yourself told me that kindness is the best righteousness. I know you, having a great 
prowess, a great energy, and a great strength. I know your non-acquiescence, imperturbability, profoundness 
like an ocean, as Lord of the earth including the oceans and as equal to Indra the Lord of celestials."

"O Rama! Eventhough you are strong, excellently skilled in archery and a truthful man, 
why are you not utilizing your arrow on demons?"

"Neither the serpent-demons, nor the divine musicians nor the demons nor the storm-gods 
are able to resist the onrush of Rama in battle."

"If the valiant Rama has any haste in my case, why does he not destroy the demons with 
his sharp arrows?!

"For what reason, even Lakshmana the tormentator of enemies, the mighty man and the valiant 
man does not protect me, by taking the command of his elder brother?'

Those two tigers among men, Rama and Lakshmana, with a sharpness equal to that of wind 
and fire, even if they are unconquerable by demons too, why are they neglecting me?"

"There is not doubt that I would have committed a great sin, for which reason those two 
brothers Rama and Lakshmana the tormentators of enemies, even when capable , are neglecting me."

Hearing the pitiable appeal Seetha with tears, Hanuma of great splendour and the son 
of wind-god spoke (as follows)

"O Seetha! Rama has grown averse to everything else, caused by grief towards you. I swear 
it to you by truth. When Rama is overpowered by grief; Lakshmana too gets tormented by grief."

"O faultless Seetha! Somehow or other, you have been discovered by me. This is not the 
time to lament. Your will see the end of your sorrow within a short time."

"Those two mighty princes, the excellent among men, are eager to see you and they will 
reduce Lanka to ashes."

"O large-eyed Seetha! Killing the cruel Ravana along with his relatives in battle, Rama 
will take you back to his own city."

"Tell me what to be expressed to Rama or to the mighty Lakshmana or to the splendourous 
Sugreeva or even to the other monkeys assembled there."

Hearing the words of Hanuma, Seetha, like the daughter of a sage, tormented with grief, 
spoke to Hanuma the monkey (as follows):

"On my behalf, salute by bowing your head and ask about the welfare of Rama, the Lord 
of the worlds, whom the magnanimous Kausalya gave birth."

(On my behalf, ask about the welfare of ) Lakshmana, that good child of Sumitra who, 
having renounced the wreaths of flowers, all the riches, pleasant and beautiful girls and even the prosperity 
difficult to be obtained in this extensive world, offered his profound respects to and pacified his 
father and mother, followed Rama to exile."

"Renouncing a great comfort, the righteous Lakshmana, acting in an affectionate manner 
towards Rama, followed him, watching over him in the forest."

"Lakshmana, who has broad shoulders like that ofa lion, mighty-armed, steady-minded and 
having pleasant looks, behaves towards Rama as towards his father and looks to me as his own mother."

"The valiant Lakshmana, on that day of occurrence, did not know that I was being taken 
away by Ravana. He serves elders. He possesses a splendour. Though capable, he does not talk much. To 
Dasaratha, my father-in-law, he is his replica a beloved and the best prince."

"Lakshmana, the younger brother of Rama is the one who is dearer to me always. That energetic 
Lakshmana carries out well, whatever load of work is entrusted to him"

"Seeing whom, Rama ceases to recollect his deceased father, that Lakshmana is to be asked 
about his well-being, as my word and on my behalf."

"O Hanuma, the excellent of monkeys and the best of monkeys! you are the model for fulfilling 
this act of addressing him in such a way that Lakshmana, the mild, every-pure and clever darling of 
Rama may bring my sorrows to an end."

"Depending on your effort, Rama will be more active with his effort the following words 
again and again to Rama, my Lord and the hero:"

"O Rama! I shall hold my life for a month. I cannot survive after a month I am telling 
you the truth."

"O valiant man! You are required to rescue me, detained (as I am) by Ravana the criminal 
and subjected to humiliation, as you (as Lord Vishnu) earlier protected Indra the Lord of celestials 
and Lakshmi the goddess of prosperity from the abode of servants and demons."

Then, untying the bright devine jewel for her head tied in her garment, Seetha gave it 
to Hanuma, saying that it might be handed over to Rama.

Taking the excellent jewel, the valiant Hanuma thereupon fitted it to his finger, since 
his arm (eventhough he had assumed his former tiny form), was not fitting to it properly.

Receiving that jewel, Hanuma the best among the monkeys, offered his salutation to seetha, 
by engaging himself in circumambulation and stood aside with humbleness.

Filled with a great delight, born out of Seetha's discovery by him, that Hanuma mentally 
sought (the presence) of Rama but stood there with just his physical body.

Taking that excellent and highly venerable jewel, worn by Seetha and by its influence 
resembling one who was shaken by a blast coming from the top of a huge mountain, Hanuma was mentally 
pleased and set out for crossing the ocean in his return journey.

undefined

undefined

undefined

That Hanuma with great resplendence thought for a moment, obtained that Ashoka garden by mind and 
jumped from the compound wall of that house.

That great Hanuma with joyful limbs, being on enclosure wall saw various trees such as Sal, beautiful 
Ashoka, Champaka full of flowers, Uddalaka, Naga, mango trees with their fruit in the colour of the snout of a 
monkey, in full blossom at the start of the spring.

Thereafter Hanuma flew like a Naracha arrow released from bow string, toward the garden covered 
by mango trees and surrounded by hundreds of creepers.

That Hanuma the simian, saw on entering that garden filled with happy humans, animals and birds 
with varied hues during spring, resounded by birds, with trees made of silver, made of gold, surrounded everywhere 
by birds and groups of animals; wonderful with wonderful trees equaling the Sun at sunrise together with trees 
of various kinds which obtained flowers and fruits, served daily by Cuckoos and by dragon flies, resounded by 
peacocks in heat and with groups of birds of various kinds.

Hanuma searching the royal daughter Seetha with excellent limbs and without blame, woke up birds 
in comfortable sleep.

Trees hit by wings of groups of birds in flight shed showers of flowers of various colours and 
of various kinds.

The son of Lord Vayu, Hanuma sprinkled with flowers shone like a mountain of flowers in the middle 
of Ashoka garden.

Seeing Hanuma running in all directions and being in the middle of trees, all living creatures 
thought Him to be Vasanta, the lord of spring.

There the Earth sprinkled by flowers of various kinds which fell down from trees shone like a well 
decorated woman.

Then those trees, shaken by the might of Hanuma the mighty one, showered wonderful flowers.

The trees with their branches, removed leaves with fallen down fruits and flowers were like defeated 
gamblers with their clothes and jewellery kept down.

The excellent trees shining with best flowers fell down instantly flowers, leaves and fruits.

All those trees losing groups of birds became being a resort to branches only like trees shook 
by wind.

Hit by Hanuma's tail, hands and feet, Ashoka garden with broken best trees became like a young 
woman with disturbed hair, with effaced sandal paste, with her auspicious teeth and lips drunk from and wounded 
by nails and by teeth.

Hanuma broke circles of great creepers by His might like the wind during rainy season, breaking 
the groups of clouds of mountain Vindhya.

That Hanuma pacing there saw diamond studded floors, silver inlaid floors, and beautiful gold inlaid 
floors.

Hanuma saw ponds filled with the best waters, together there and there with stairs embedded with 
diamonds of great value, with pearls and corals as sand, with bottoms made of crystal and precious stones, shone 
by trees of golden hue and of wonderful hue at banks containing beds of lotuses in full blossom and lilies, resounded 
by chakravaka birds nearby, sounded by water fowls, resounded by swans and cranes, together with tall trees, with 
nectar like waters, with hundreds of auspicious creepers, covered by the flowers of santaana trees, surrounded 
by various shrubs with middle regions of karaveera and also wells and in various shapes.

Thereafter the monkey warrior Hanuma saw a mountain which was a beautiful mountain in the world, 
equaling cloud with high peaks, with wonderful peaks surrounded in all directions by peaks, spread by caves and 
covered by different trees.

Hanuma saw river which fell down from the mountain like a beloved (young wife) who fell down after 
jumping from the lap of a loved one shone by trees whose ends fell down in water or like a woman in anger being 
detained by her near and dear. That great Hanuma again saw that river with water, turning back like a beloved 
woman reaching her beloved again, being reconciled to her beloved one.

The best among vanaras and the son of Vayu, that Hanuma saw near to that mountain, lotus ponds 
together with many groups of birds.

He also saw an artificial pond filled with cold water, with steps embedded with best diamonds, 
shone by the sand of pearls, wonderful forest with very big buildings made by Vishwakarma, with groups of artificial 
trees decorated in all directions.

There whatever trees were there with flowers and fruits, all those were together with umbrellas, 
together with big platforms and with smaller golden platforms.

The monkey warrior Hanuma saw one shimshupaa tree golden in colour covered with many groups of 
creepers and with many leaves surrounded everywhere with platforms made of gold.

Hanuma saw lands, mountain springs, and some other golden trees equal to fire.

Then the courageous Hanuma thought thus: "Like the sun by the radiance of Mount Meru, by the radiance 
of those trees, I am of golden colour."

Seeing that shimshupaa tree with groups of trees of golden colour blown by the wind, with the sound 
of hundreds of tinkle bells, Hanuma got surprised.

Hanuma with great arms climbing up that shimshupaa tree with well flowered ends, beautiful tree, 
mature with young shoots and leaves and covered by leaves (thought thus).

"I will see by God's grace, Seetha who is interested in the sight of Sri Rama while she is moving 
here and there with grief."

This Ashoka garden of evil-souled Ravana is definitely beautiful; it is well decorated by Champaka 
trees, by sandal trees and by Vakula trees.

"This pond also served by groups of birds is beautiful; that wife of Sri Rama definitely will come 
for this pond."

"The wife of Sri Rama dear to Sri Rama, a chaste wife, soul captivating one, expert at moving in 
forest, that Janaki will definitely come."

"Otherwise one with the eyes of a deer, emaciated by the thought of Sri Rama, that noble one will 
come for this garden."

"Tortured by grief for Sri Rama, with beautiful eyes, interested always living in the garden, that 
Devi moving about in the garden will come."

"The beloved wife of Sri Rama, the daughter of king Janaka, the chaste wife, earlier always was 
interested the denizens of the garden. This is true."

"The ever youthful one with the best complexion, Seetha interested in the rites of Sandhya time 
will definitely come to this river with the auspicious water for Sandhya rite."

"Whoever Seetha, the auspicious wife, a dear one of Sri Rama, the king of kings, to that Seetha 
this Ashoka garden, an auspicious one, is well suited also."

"That Devi with the face like that of the moon, if alive, she definitely will come for this river 
with auspicious water."

The great-souled Hanuma thus thinking being concealed in the mass of well flowered leaves saw everything 
observing everywhere.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Ravana listening to Seetha's words which were harsh thereafter replied to Seetha unpleasant words 
which are seen to be pleasant.

"In whatever way gentle language is used to women in that way they will be under control. In whatever 
way men speak dear words, in that way they will be rejected."

"In your matter desire which has risen up is subdueing my anger like horses running obtaining a 
bad path being subdued by a good charioteer."

"Desire of men is unfavourable. In which man desire is tied up, in that man there is compassion 
and fondness."

"O one with a beautiful face! For this reason although you are suitable to be killed and suitable 
to be humilaited, interested in Rama who is in sham exile, I am not killing you."

"O Seetha! Here whatever harsh words you are speaking about me, because of those words, you are 
suitable to be horribly slayed."

The king of ogres Ravana speaking thus to Seetha, full of anger and fury spoke subsequent word 
to Seetha.

"O Seetha with best complexion! Whatever limit has been made by me to you, those two months are 
protectable to me. Thereafter ascend my bed."

"Above two months you not desiring me as husband will be killed in my kitched for my breakfast."

Seeing Seetha being frightened by Ravana those Deva and Gandharva maidens grieved with troubled 
eyes.

Some in the way of lips and in like manner some others with faces and eyes consoled that Seetha 
frightened by that ogre.

Consoled by them Seetha proud of virtuous conduct spoke words beneficial to self to the king of 
ogres Ravana.

"Whoever prevents you from these actions which are blameable, such a person interested in your 
welfare there is none. This is definite."

"In all the three worlds except you who even by heart will desire me who am the wife of virtuous 
Rama like Sachi the wife of Indra."

"O vile ogre! Whatever sinful word you spoke to me who is the wife of the great resplendent Rama, 
from that word where will you go to be released?"

"Like an elephant in rut and a hare at war in the forest, in the same way O vile one! Rama is like 
an elephant and you are said to be like a hare."

"Such you are not shameful abusing the lord of Ikshvaku dynasty Rama. You are not getting Rama's 
matter so much."

"O ignoble one! your these eyes which are cruel, crooked, which are black and reddish brown, which 
are seeing me, for what reason are they not falling down."

"Thus speaking about me who am the wife of virtuous Rama and the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha how 
your tongue did not fall off."

"O Ravana! Although you are suited to be burnt into ashes, not having the mandate of Rama and preserving 
austerity, I am not reducing you into ashes with my glory."

"Wise Rama's I am not capable of being abducted by you. This act has been made for your slaying. 
In this there is no doubt."

"By you who is strong, brother of Kubera possessed of army, removing Rama for what reason abduction 
of wife has been done."

King of rakshasas Ravana listening to Seetha's words turned around his cruel eyes and saw Seetha.

Ravana was qual to a black cloud, with big shoulders and neck with the strength and gait of a lion, 
glorious with radiant tip of tongue and eyes.

He was tall with moving front portion of crown, with excellent garlands and anointments, wearing 
red garlands and clothes, with ornaments made of refined gold.

Like Mount Mandara tied by Vasuki for producing nectar, Ravana was well tied by a black big thread.

Equalling a mountain the king of ogres shone with those perfect shoulders like Mount Mandara with 
its peaks.

With the color of just risen sun, decorated by earrings, he was like a mountain with Ashoka trees 
with red flowers and shoots.

Equalling a Kalpavriksha he was like the embodiment of spring season. Like a funeral mound in a 
grave-yard was horrible even though decorated.

With red eyes due to anger Ravana was looking at Seetha sighing like a serpant and spoke to Seetha.

O foloower of Rama posessing bad conduct, without wealth! Now I will destroy you like sun destroying 
morning twilight with light.

The king Ravana who causes enemies to cry thus speaking to Seetha, thereafter ordered all ogre 
women with horrible appearances.

Ravana ordered one with a single eye, one with a single ear and one with ears as covering, one 
with cow's wars, one with ears of an elephant, one with dangling ears, one without ears and one with the feet 
of an elephant and one with the feet of a horse, one with feet of a cow,one with hair over feet, one with a single 
eye and one with a single foot, one with big feet, one without feet, one with a big head and neck,one with big 
breasts and stomach, and one with big mouth and eyes, one with a long tongue, one without tongue, one without 
nose, one with the face of a lion, one with the face of a cow,one with the face of a pig.

"O ogres! How the daughter of Janaka, Seetha becomes under my control quickly, thus all of you 
together do that task."

"With hostile and favourable tasks, with kind words, with gifts and dividing words and exertion 
of punishment, bring Seetha under my possession."

Ravana thus ordered again and again with a mind full of lust and anger frightened Seetha.

Thereafter an ogre named Dhanyamalini quickly neared Ravana, embraced him and spoke these words.

"O king! Sport with me. O lord of ogres! Of what use to you is this Seetha who is colorless and 
a wreched human."

"O king! Lord Barhma did not assign to Her wonderful best luxuries earned by the might of your 
arms. This is definite."

"The body of one who desires a woman without desire suffers pain. Good happiness will occur to 
one who loves a woman who desires him."

Thus spoken to by that ogre that Ravana who was strong equalling a cloud, thereafter being taken 
away turned back laughing."

That Ravana departing was as though shaking the earth and entered his house with the lustre of 
blazing sun shine.

Deva and Gandharva maidens and Naga maidens surrounding Ravana in all directions entered that best 
among houses.

That Ravana frightening Seetha who was steadfastly intent on virtue and who was shaking, leaving 
Seetha, infatuated by love, entered his own house which was shining.

undefined

undefined

undefined

With a face continually shedding tears, Seetha an young woman, thus speaking with a downward face, 
started to weep.

Seetha was crying like a mad one, like an intoxicated one, with a deluded mind. Like a female horse 
rolling on ground, Seetha rolled on the ground.

"While Rama was heedless (taken away by Mareecha), I who have been crying was forcibly brought 
overpowered by the ogre Ravana who can wear desired form."

"Being under the control of ogresses, being frightened very horribly, thinking and being tormented 
by grief, I do not desire to live."

"Without Rama, a great car-warrior, living in the midst of ogresses, there is no use with life 
to me; not with wealth, not with ornaments."

"Or my this heart truly is made of iron. It is undecaying and without death. By what reason is 
it not destroying with sorrow?"

"Whoever I with a sinful life made to be without Rama, protecting life even for a moment, to such 
me who am ignoble, who am bad wife, shame on me."

"Without husband Rama who is the lord of the earth with ocean at the end, a pleasant talker, what 
is the interest to me in life or in comfort."

"I will leave the body. Let it be split into pieces or let it be eaten. I without husband will 
not tolerate sorrow for a long time."

"I will not touch even with my left foot Ravana an ogre of reprehensible conduct. What to say of 
desiring him."

"Whoever Ravana with a cruel nature is desiring to solicit me, that Ravana does not know him to 
be refused; he does not know his race."

"Even if cut or if divided into parts in blazing fire, I will not reach Ravana. What is the use 
with your prattling for a long time?"

"Rama is famous, is a wise man, is compassionate with a good conduct. Due to the deterioration 
of my fortune, I doubt He became hard hearted."

"By whom alone fourteen thousand of ogres have been destroyed, why is that Rama not saving me."

"I am withheld by the ogre Ravana with little strength. My husband is indeed capable of killing 
Ravana in a war."

"By which Rama Viradha, best among ogres, has been killed in Dandaka forest in a war, why is that 
He not saving me?"

"This city of Lanka being in the middle of ocean is difficult to be attacked. But there will not 
be an obstacle to flying of Rama's arrows."

"What now is that reason by which Rama with a firm courage is not protecting His dear wife stolen 
by an ogre."

"I doubt that Rama elder to Laksmana does not know me to be here. After knowing will that glorious 
Rama tolerate this outrage?"

"Whoever Jatayu nearing Rama will have let known to Rama that Seetha was stolen, that king of vultures 
has been killed by Ravana in war."

"A great deed has been done by that Jatayu, thus protecting me, although of old age, standing in 
a dual combat with Ravana."

"If that Rama knows me to be living here, with anger He will make the world to be without ogres 
with His arrows now."

"Rama will blow away the city of Lanka, will dry up the great ocean, will destroy the name and 
fame of Ravana."

"Thereafter how I am crying in this way, in the same way, in very house, ogresses with killed husbands 
will cry again and again. There is no doubt in this."

"Rama together will Lakshmana will search the city of Lanka belonging to ogres. An enemy seen by 
those two will indeed not live even for a moment."

"This Lanka shortly will become like a graveyard, with paths agitated with smoke of funeral pyres, 
crowded with a group of vultures."

"In a short time only I will attain my desire. This evil course is telling of destruction of you 
all."

"Here in Lanka whatever inauspicious things are being seen, from those, in a short while Lanka 
will become deprived of glory."

"While the sinful, vile ogre Ravana is being killed, Lanka which is unconquerable till now, definitely 
will get drying up like a woman who lost husband."

"Now abounding in pious festivities, the city of Lanka with lost lord together with ogresses will 
become like a woman with lost husband."

"In a short while here in every house I can definitely hear the sound of ogresses crying being 
tormented by grief."

"The city of Lanka will become burnt by Rama's arrows together with darkness, with destroyed luster 
with killed best ogres."

"Will that Rama who is a strong man with red eye corners know me to be in the house of Ravana."

"Whatever time has been ordered by this cruel and vilest of men Ravana, this time has come to me. 
That death decreed to me does not hold good to this evil one (Ravana)."

"Whoever sinful ogres who do not know what should not be done, due to their unrighteousness now 
there will be a great calamity. These meat eating ogres do not know virtue."

"An ogre will definitely eat me for breakfast. What should such I do without Rama with pleasing 
appearance? I am grieving a lot not seeing Rama with red eye corners."

"Now if there exists any one who is a giver of poison here, I without husband quickly will see 
the god Yama."

"That Rama elder to Lakshmana may not know me to be alive. If those two know me to be alive, then 
it cannot be said that they will not do my search on earth."

"That valiant Rama who is the elder brother of Lakshmana due to grief of me, leaving the body on 
earth has gone to celestial world. This is certain."

"Whoever is seeing my husband Rama with eyes resembling a lotus flower such Devas, Siddhas together 
with Gandharvas and great sages are fortunate."

"Or to that Rama with a desire in virtuousness, who is intelligent, a sage-king, the supreme spirit, 
there is no use with me, his wife."

"Friendly disposition will occur in what is being seen. There is no friendship to one who does 
not see. Ungrateful ones destroy frindship. But Rama will not destroy friendship."

"I who is a woman who is perishing without the chief Rama to such me are there no good qualities 
or has my fortune diminished."

"To me who is deprived of Rama with untroubled reputation, a warrior, annihilator of enemies, a 
great soul, more than living, death is good."

"Or those two brothers who are best among men giving up weapons in the forest may have become dwellers 
of forest eating roots and fruits."

"Or Rama and Lakshmana the warrior brothers may have been killed by the evil soul king of ogres 
Ravana by deceit."

"Under such circumstances and time, such I in all ways am desiring to die. Even in this grief, 
death is not bestowed on me."

"Great souled ones with abandoned sins, with a conquered mind, those with great fortune, sages 
are indeed fortunate to whom there is no pleasure and displeasure."

"From pleasure sorrow and from displeasure great fear do not occur to great souls. Whoever are 
separated from pleasure and displeasure, my obeisance to such great souls."

"Left by dear Rama with a well known mind coming under the control of sinful Ravana, such I will 
leave breath of life."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Hanuma, the son of Vayu, saw a best tall building and a wide one in the middle of
that best group of houses.


That building of Ravana filled with many edifices was half a Yojana long and one
Yojana tall.


Hanuma, the destructor of enemies, moved around in all directions searching for
Seetha the wide eyed daughter of King of Videha


Thereafter, Hanuma the glorious one neared and observed the best residence of
Rakshasas and the house of Ravana, containing elephants with four tusks and also those with three
tusks, those with two tusks and still not crowded. It was protected by soldiers bearing raised
weapons.


That building surrounded by the wives of Ravana, by demonesses, and princesses
brought by strength, was like an ocean filled with crocodiles, big fishes, sharks and other fishes,
moved by the speed of wind, and together with serpants.


Whatever wealth is at Kubera, whatever riches at Indra with green horses, all that
affluence was at Ravana's house. That wealth was always without reduction.


Whatever was the fortune of Kubera the King of Yakshas, of Yama and of Varuna, the
same fortune or even greater treasure was at this house of Ravana.


Hanuma saw another house in the middle of that house, a well built one consisting of
many elephants in rut.


Whatever wonderful aeroplane by the name of Pushpaka, decorated with all kinds of
precious stones, made by Visvakarma in heaven for lord Brahma, whatever plane Kubera obtained by
great austerity from Lord Brahma, Ravana obtained that plane by prowess defeating Kubera.


Supported by pillars decorated with images of wolves, with silver and golden hue and
which were well made, radiant with splendour, decorated all around with rooms equalling Mount Meru
and Mount Mandara, as though touching the sky with an auspicious shape.


Well made by Visvakarma and resembling Fire and Sun in splendour, with stairways
made of gold and with beautiful and best platforms;


With windows and ventilation holes made of gold and also made of crystal, with
platforms made of sapphires and emeralds;


Shone by floors embellished with corals of strange hue and with precious stones of
great value, with pearls without comparison;


Reddish and resembling gold, together with sandal wood having a good smell and
brilliant like the Sun at noon;


The great Hanuma alighted the best aeroplane called Pushpaka with an excellent form
decorated by rows of upper floors.


That Hanuma then being there, smelled a wonderful sweet fragrance like wind with an
appearance, created from drinks and foods, including cooked rice diffused on all sides.


That sweet smell was as though saying thus to that Hanuma : "Come here!", like a
relative to a best relative pointing to there wherever that Ravana was.


Hanuma started thereafter there (in that direction) and saw an auspicious great
hall, close to heart of Ravana, like a delightful best woman.


That hall was made of stairways embedded with diamonds, decorated with golden
windows, with a floor embellished with crystal, with shapes made from ivory in the middle.


Well decorated with pearls, corals and also with silver and gold and with diamond
studded pillars and also decorated with many pillars.


By pillars slightly bent with no distortion, which were very tall and well decorated
all over, that hall was as though starting for sky with very high wings.


Covered by a wonderful large carpet with all earth's characteristics like rivers,
mountains, oceans, forests, painted over, that hall was like the vast earth together with states
and rows of houses.


It was resounded by birds in heat, made fragrant by excellent perfumes, hung with
best tapestries and inhabited by the king of rakshasas


It was made smokey by the fumes of agallocum. It was a pure one white like a swan,
wonderful by the decoration of flowers, like divine cow with a great radiance.


That excellent hall was causing happiness to heart, causing a fair complexion,
destroying sorrow and was as though producing prosperity.


Like a mother, then that hall governed by Ravana caused satisfaction to all five
sensory organs with all the excellent five objects of the senses.


Hanuma thought thus : "This is heaven! This is indeed the abode of Devas! This is a
city of Indra. This might be the result of a great austerity."


Like gamblers defeated by greater gamblers in gambling, Hanuma saw golden hued lamps
being still, as though in thought.


Hanuma thought thus : "This building shines by the light of lamps and the brilliance
of Ravana and also due to the radiance of jewellery."


Thereafter Hanuma saw a thousand of best women sitting on the rug with clothing of
various colours and decorated in a variety of ways.


Then at the turn of midnight, those women slept deeply resting after playing during
night, with a deep sleep caused by liquor.


That sleeping group of women, adorned with jewels which were not making sound, shone
like a great park of lotuses with calm swans and bees.


Hanuma saw faces of those best women, with teeth covered by lips with closed eyes
and with lotus fragrance.


At that time, those faces shone which became like lotuses in blossom during day time
and again were like lotuses with closed petals at night.


Hanuma thought that drunk bees definitely are desiring again and again these lotus
faces like lotuses in blossom.


The glorious great Hanuma thought as above by recourse to reason. He also thought
thus "Those faces equal lotuses by their qualities such as beauty, fragrance, and others".


That hall of Ravana's being shone by those women, glittered like a calm cloudless
sky in autumn shone by stars.


That lord of Rakshasas surrounded by those women shone like the radiant moon
surrounded by stars.


Then Hanuma thought thus : "Whatever meteors together with residue of piety fall
down from the sky, all those meteors had been together as these women".


There the luster, complexion and grace of those women clearly resembled great stars
which emitted an auspicious radience.


Those women with dishevelled large thick garlands and scattered excellent jewels
during the time of drinking, dancing etc., were with consciousness stolen by sleep.


Best women with disturbed sacred marks (tilaka) on forehead became with displaced
anklets, became with necklaces fallen off to side.


Some other women became tied with pearl necklaces, some others became with tied-up
waist ornaments (and) resembled young female horses who had walked long.


Some others wearing nice earrings with flower garlands that were torn and disturbed,
resembled creepers, tread upon by an elephant in a big forest.


Big pearl necklaces with the radiance of moon-rays in the middle of breasts of some
other women shone like sleeping swans.


And of some other women, necklaces made with cat's eye gems resembled birds called
Kadambas and for some others golden chains were like Chakravaka birds.


Those women with buttocks resembling sand dunes, shone like rivers filled with swans
and birds called Karandas and decorated by Chakravaka birds.


Those sleeping women shone like rivers with their smiles as flower buds, with golden
jewellery as big lotuses, with their behaviours as crocodiles, with fame as banks.


Auspicious lines of decoration which were on smooth parts of some other women and on
nipples, were like jewellery.


Edges of clothing (worn by them) disturbed by air from breathing of some other
women, were being fluttered again and again on their faces.


Those edges of clothes with various beautiful colours, shone at the base of Ravana's
wives' throats like hoisted flags of beautiful shine.


Here ear-rings of some beautiful women with a good glory, also moved lightly due to
the air from breathing of those women.


Then comforting breath from the faces of those women, by nature fragrant with the
smell of liquor made of Sarkara, served Ravana.


Some women of Ravana smelled co-wives' faces again and again imagining them to be
face of Ravana.


Those best women with greatly devoted mind in Ravana, then not being on own will,
brought delight only to their co-wives.


Some other women slept there, making as pillows their arms decorated with bracelets
and beautiful clothes.


Another woman slept on another's bosom, again another woman slept on her shoulder,
another woman slept on another woman's thigh and another slept on her breasts.


Overcome with heat and friendship, they resorted to thighs, sides, waist and back of
one another, with mutual limbs placed on one another.


That garland of women tied with the rope of each other's shoulders shone like a
flower garland with dragon flies on it tied in thread.


That group of women of Ravana, tied by each other as garland with mixed group of
flowers, with beautiful shoulders entwined promiscuously, hair like an exalted garden with a flower
garland tied together of creepers in bloom due to the caress of the lord of wind in the vernal in
the month of Vaisakha, with entwined beautiful trees.


Then it was not possible to make clear the knowledge of jewellery, body parts and
clothes of those women even for those used to them.


While Ravana slept comfortably, golden lamps shining brilliant, were as though
seeing without closing eyes, those women of various glows.


Women of royal sages, brahmanas and demons and of Gandharvas, of Rakshasas - all
those unmarried girls surrendered from lust to Ravana.


All those women had been stolen by Ravana with a desire for war, some together with
heat of youth obtained Ravana being desired by god of love.


There, even one woman had not been obtained forcefully by the strong Ravana, except
for that daughter of Janaka, Seetha. Every other woman had been obtained by her character alone and
there was no woman who had desire in another man, and there also was none with another lover.


And there was no wife of his without a good lineage, there was no one with less
beauty, no one without skill, no one without service, none with low intellect, no one without
causing desire to lover.


Following thought occurred to Hanuma with a pious mind : "It would have been good
for this Ravana if the virtuous wife of Rama had been left happy with her husband in the same such
manner as these wives of the king of rakshasas."


Hanuma became gloomy and thought thus: "Seetha is definitely the best by virtues;
then this lord of Lanka even though being great otherwise, did an evil and an un-gentlemanly deed
with her.


Thus, this is the 9th chapter in Sundara Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana, the First Epic
poem of India.

undefined

undefined

undefined

After informing all this, Hanuma the son of wind-god started telling more of the following 
words.

"By the power of virtuousness of Seetha, Rama's effort and Sugreeva's zeal are getting 
fulfilled. My mind too is devoted to her."

"Ravana, the king of demons, who is strong in all ways, can burn away the three worlds 
by the power of his penance. Even if he is enraged, he can scorch away his adversaries."

"His body, which touched Seetha the daughter of Janaka, was not destroyed because of 
his askesis. Even a flame, when fully touched with one's hand, cannot do that which Seetha would, if 
stirred by anger."

"This work (of mine in the form of Seetha's discovery) has been informed to you in this 
way. It is indeed proper to see those two princes (Rama and Lakshmana) along with Seetha, after taking 
permission from all the great monkeys headed by Jambavan.

"I am sufficient, even alone; to destroy rapidly that City of Lanka together with those 
troops of demons as also the mighty Ravana."

"When accompanied by you, who are strong, whose spirit is disciplined, who are proficient 
in the use of arms, valiant, longing for victory and moving by jumps, how much more is required?"

"In the battle, I on my part will kill Ravana along with his army, his forerunners, his 
sons and his brothers."

"In the battle, I can blow out the missiles presided over by Indra the lord of celestials, 
Brahma the creator, Rudra the god of destruction, Vayu the wind-god, Varuna the god of water and even 
those missiles even if they are difficult to be looked at, employed by Indrajit (Ravana's eldest son).

"My prowess, when permitted by you, will frustrate that Ravana. The shower of rocks, 
which will be unequalled and incessant, discharged by me, can kill even celestials. How much more those 
demons?"

"The ocean may overflow its shore. Mount Mandara may move from its position. But, in 
battle, no army of adversaries can stagger Jambavan."

"The heroic Angada, the son of Vali alone, is sufficient to destroy all the troops of 
demons and even the demons who were their progenitors."

"By the rapid movement of the thighs of the high-souled Neela and of Panasa, even Mount 
Mandara can be shattered. How much more, the demons in battle?"

"Tell me any one who can fight against Mainda or Dvivida, among Gandharvas the celestial 
singers or Uragas the serpents or Pakshis the birds or the celestials or the demons or Yakshas the semi-divine 
beings."

"These two illustrious sons of Ashvini Kumaras, Mainda and Dvivida are the foremost among 
the monkeys. In the battle-field, I do not find anyone who can fight against these two monkeys."

"Proud of having received boons from Brahma the creator and their grandfather and abiding 
in a supreme haughtiness, these two foremost among all the monkeys live on Amrita the nectar."

"Long ago, Brahma the grandfather of all the worlds gave an unequal boon to them in honour 
of Ashvini Kumaras regarding their inviolability."

"By the pride of those boons, those two heroic monkeys harassed a great army of celestials 
and thereupon drank up nectar, excited as they were with joy."

"Let all the other monkeys stand aside. Even these Mainda and Dvivida on their part are 
capable of destroying the entire city of Lanka together with its horses, chariots and elephants."

"I alone burnt and destroyed the City of Lanka. In all its royal high-ways, the name 
(of Rama and others) was proclaimed by me as follows:

"'Victorious is Rama, the exceedingly strong and the mighty Lakshmana too! Victorious 
is King Sugreeva, protected by Rama. I am Hanuma, a servant of Rama and the son of wind-god'. In this 
way, the name (of Rama and others) was heralded by me everywhere."

"In the midst of Ashoka garden of the evil-minded Ravana and underneath a Shimshupa tree, 
the virtuous Seetha was seen staying dejected, encircled as she was with female-demons, agonized with 
grief and anguish, lusterless like a digit of the moon encircled by a line of clouds and disregarding 
that Ravana who is arrogant of his strength."

"Seetha, a devoted and virtuous wife, having charming hips, has been placed under restraint. 
The auspicious Seetha is devoted to Rama in all ways, giving her undivided thought to Rama like Shachi 
the goddess, giving her concern to Indra the destroyer of strong holds."

"Weaving that single piece of cloth, which she had on her person even while being borne 
away by Ravana, and likewise covered with dust, she was seen by me in a miserable condition with her 
grief and anguish, devoted as she was to the welfare of her husband."

"I saw Seetha in a royal pleasure garden, amidst some female-demons. Seetha was being 
frightened time and again by those ugly female-demons. That Seetha, wearing a single braid of hair and 
looking depressed, was fully engaged in thinking about her lord. Looking like a lotus with a discoloured 
figure in winter, she had determined to die, utterly averting to do anything with Ravana."

"With great difficulty, I created confidence in that fawn-eyed Seetha. Thereafter, I 
talked to her and explained everything to her. She was delighted to hear the companionship cropped up 
between Rama and Sugreeva."

"That high-souled Seetha does not kill Ravana who has committed an offence because she 
conducts herself well with restraint and since supreme is her devotion to her lord."

"Rama, on his part, will become mere instrument in killing that Ravana. That Seetha, 
who is by her own nature, on delicate-limbed woman, was emaciated because of separation from her lord. 
She had grown thin like the learning of a scholar continuing his studies even on the first day of lunar 
fortnight (which must be observed as a complete holiday by students."

"Thus, the illustrious Seetha remains immersed in grief. Let all that be done, which 
requires to be counteracted by way of a relief in this matter."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing those words of the high=souled Hanuma, Ravana duly excited with anger, ordered 
for the killing of Hanuma.

While it was ordered by the evil-natured Ravana for the killing of Hanuma, Vibhishana 
did not agree to the killing of Hanuma, who was entrusted with the functions of a messenger.

Seeing Ravana getting enraged and looking to that affair (of killing of an envoy) that 
has arisen, Vibhishana who was firm in accompanying any object, reflected upon an appropriate action 
to be done.

Then, deciding about a right action, Vibhishna, who was silled in communication and a 
conqueror of enemies, spoke softly the following very meaningful and useful words to Ravana, his venerable 
borther.

"O king of demons! Forgive and give up your anger. Be gracious and hear my words. Virtuous 
kings of excellence, knowing the distant and the near, do not cause killing of an envoy."

"O hero! Killing of this monkey is against a royal virtue and any universal custom condemns 
it. Hence, it is improper for you also to do it."

"You are indeed the knower of what is right. You are a person of gratitude. You are well-versed 
in royal virtues. You know both the distant and the near in beings. You know the highest truth."

"If even learned persons like you are seized by anger, then the knowledge of scriptures 
is indeed just a labour in vain."

"O king of demons! O annihilator of enemies, dangerous to be approached! Therefore, be 
graceful. After ascertaining about right and wrong, let appropriate punishment be ordered to the envoy."

Hearing the words of Vibhishana, Ravana the lord of demons was greatly enraged and replied 
in the following words:

"O Vibhishana, the annihilator of enemies! There is no sin, even if the sinners are killed. 
So, I shall kill this monkey, who performed sins."

Hearing those words, rooted in unrighteousness, enveloped in a great anger and accepted 
by the dishonourable, Vibhishana the best among those who weer endowed with understanding, spoke the 
following words, comprising of the highest truth.

"O king of demons! O lord of Lanka! Be gracious enough. Hear my words endowed with righteousness 
and significance. O king! Sages say that messengers should not be killed at all places and at all times."

"There is no doubt that this enemy is arrogant. He has created an unlimited displeasure 
to us. But, sages do not talk about the killing of an envoy There are indeed severeal punishments, intended 
for an envoy."

"Some of the punishments to an envoy are-deforming the limbs, striking with a whip, shaving 
the head and impressing marks on the body. Indeed, we have not heard at any time of killing a messenger."

"How can a person like you, holding an intellect trained in religious merit and purpose 
and a right judgement on cause and effect, subject to anger? Wise people indeed contain their anger."

"O hero! There is no one equal to you, who can discuss about the law or duty, none about 
universal custom and none in capturing the essence of scriptures. You are indeed excellent among all 
the celestials and demons in these matter."

"O king of demons! You are valiant. You are heroic. Even celestials and demons cannot 
conquer you. You conquered a multitude of proud celestials and demons together with their kings in battles 
several times"

"I do not see any merit in killing this monkey. Let this carnal punishment be employed 
on those by whom this monkey was sent."

"He is a person, sent by our enemies, whether he is good or bad. It is not worthy of 
killing him, who is an envoy, who is dependent on others and who talks for the cause of others."

"O king! Moreover, If he is killed, I do not find any other person, who can travel through 
the sky and come here again to this shore of the great ocean."

"O conqueror of enemies! Therefore, do not make efforts to kill him. On the other hand, 
you ought to strengthen such effort on celestials including indra."

"O Ravana, who is fond of war! If he is dead, I do not find any other hero, who can incite 
those two arrogant princes, who are hindered by a long distance, for war."

"O Ravana who can gladden the hearts of demons! It is not proper for you, who are difficult 
to be conquered by even celestials and demons having sufficient prowess energy and courage, to crush 
the arrival of a war."

"There are more than a crore of valiant warriors in your charge, well-maintained, who 
desire your welfare, quite devoted, having colossal merits, born in a good tribe, holding high spirits 
and excellent wielders of weapons."

"Therefore, let some who follow your command, by talking a portion of your army, subjugate 
those two stupid princes, in order to make your power known to your adversaries."

Ravana, the mighty and the eminent king of demons as also the lord of ogres and the adversary 
of the world of celestials, understood the cherished and excellent message of Vibhishana his brother 
with his due presence of mind."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Coming to know that the chief minister's sons were killed by the high souled who had 
cleverly concealed the expression made an excellent thought.

That Ravana ordered (as follows) five foremost leaders of the army viz. Virupaksha, Yupaksha, 
Durdhara the demon, Praghasa and Bhasakarna, all of them brave demons, skilled in strategy, eager to 
capture Hanuma and equal to the speed of wind in battle.

He ordered as follows: "March, all of you O generals, taking a large army together that 
mokey be punished."

"Approaching that monkey, you ought to become diligent. Action should be taken by you 
which is not out of accord with time and space."

"Judging him by his actions, I do not think him as a mere monkey. By all means, he may 
be an evil spirit, putting on an extraordinary might."

"This evil spirit may be some being evolved for our sake by Indra the Lord of celestials 
with a strength of his askesis. Celestials, demons, sages along with Nagas the serpent-demons, Yakshas 
the spirits and Gandharvas the celestials musicians were conquered by my along with you all together. 
Even same offensive surely, will be effected to us by them. It is such an evil spirit created by Indra. 
There is no doubt about it. Let it be captured forcibly. This monkey of a great prowess should not be 
despised by you."

"Earlier, I saw the monkeys of a great prowess like Vali and Sugreeva, the mighty Jambavan, 
Nila the Chief of army and so on like Dvivida. their scheme of performance is not so fearful as this; 
nor their efficacy, nor their prowess, nor their intellect, nor this capacity to change their form or 
energy at will."

"Keeping in view that it is a great evil spirit standing in the form of a monkey, exert 
a great effort and capture it."

"The three worlds including Indra, celestials, demons and humans are not fit to stand 
before you in the battle-field."

"Even then, the one who is skilled in strategy, desirous of a victory in a battle is 
to protect himself. Victory in a battle is indeed unreliable."

All of them, having a great strength and a blaze equal to that of fire, accepting the 
orders of their king and augmenting their strength with chariots, elephants in rut, horses of extra 
ordinary swiftness and various kinds of sharp weapons, sallied forth with a great speed.

Thereafter, those valiant demons saw that Hanuma the great monkey, encircled by his rays 
of splendour like a rising sun, shining, standing on the archy door-way, possessing enormous energy, 
strong mental disposition and colossal strength.

Immediately on seeing that Hanuma of great intellect, of great swiftness and of a gigantic 
body, all those demons, stationed in all quarters, attacked him with their terrific weapons from every 
side.

Durdhara discharged five sharp and fierce steel arrows with a lustre of black lily-petals 
and yellow tops to descend into Hanuma's head.

Pierced in the head by those fire arrows, Hanuma leapt roaring in the sky, making the 
roar reverberating in all directions.

Then the mighty and the valiant Durdhara leapt into the sky with his chariot. Stretching 
his bow and throwing hundreds of sharp arrows, he attacked Hanuma.

Hanuma warded him off from showering the arrows on him in the sky, as the wind wards 
off a rainy cloud from raining at the end of a monsoon.

Thus afflicted by that Durdhara, Hanuma then emitted a roar once again and swiftly expanded 
his body.

Like a mass of lightning on a mountain, Hanuma instantaneously fell on Durdhara's chariot, 
by jumping up from far above with great speed.

Losing his chariot whose axle and pole had been broken and all his eight horses destroyed, 
Durdhara then dropped down, losing his life, to the ground.

Engrossed in anger to see his fallen on the ground, the inviolable virupaksha and Yupaksha, 
the annihilators of enemies, jumped up into the air.

Jumping up in the air all of a sudden those two demons struck in the chest with their 
clubs that long-armed Hanuma standing in clear sky.

Striking down the swiftness of those violent demons, the mighty Hanuma whose prowess 
is equal to that of Garuda the eagle, again descended on to the ground.

Approaching a sala tree and uprooting it, that Hanuma the monkey killed those two valiant 
demons.

Getting to know all those mighty three killed by Hanuma, Praghasa with a great alacrity, 
forcefully attacked Hanuma. The valiant Bhasakarna, highly enraged, attacked taking a spear in his hand.

The two generals stood by the side of the illustrious Hanuma. Praghasa pierced Hanuma 
with a sharp-pointed spear and Bhasakarna attacked him with a dart.

With his limbs wounded by those two demons, that Hanuma with his body-hair anointed by 
blood, became enraged, with his blaze similar to that of a rising sun.

Having plucked up the top of a mountain with its various animals serpents and trees, 
the heroic Hanuma the best among monkeys, killed those two demons.

When those five army-generals have been killed, Hanuma then destroyed that remaining 
army.

Like Indra the thousand-eyed god destroying the demons, Hanuma destroyed the horses by 
striking them with horses, the elephants with elephants, the warriors with warriors and the chariots 
with chariots.

The earth had its path-ways blocked on all sides with the elephants and the horses killed, 
with the demons killed and with the big chariots which had their axles broken.

Like Yama the Time-spirit waiting for the right moment for the destruction of the mortals, 
the heroic Hanuma, killing the eminent demons and the army-generals with their troops and vehicles in 
the combat, waited for the right moment at the arch-way.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Filled with anger on his son Aksha having been killed by Hanuma, yet reconciling his 
mind, the high-minded Ravana the king of demons for his part then instructed Indrajit (his eldest son) 
possessing the qualities of god (as follows):

"You are well acquainted with mystic missiles. You are the foremost among those who are 
conversant with weapons. You cause anguish even to celestials and demons. Indra and other celestials 
perceived your performance with your missiles acquired by propitiating Brahma the creator."

"Celestials together with troops of storm-gods joining Indra the lord of celestials were 
not able to endure the strength of your missiles in battle."

"In a battle against you, every one in the three worlds gets exhausted. You are protected 
yourself by your great intellect and strong arms. You are guarded by your penance. You are aware of 
apportioning place and time properly."

"There is nothing impossible for you in your acts of war. With your purposeful thinking, 
everything is possible for you. There is none in the three worlds, who does not know the force of missiles 
as also your (physical) strength."

"The strength of your penance as also your prowess and strength in battle resemble mine. 
Admitting you in the squeeze of battle, my mind does not get fatigues because of the re-assurance."

"All the Kimkaras, a demon called Jambumali, the heroic sons of ministers and the five 
chiefs of army have been killed, as also the army together with highly abundant number of horses, elephants 
and chariots."

"Your beloved brother Aksha the prince also has been killed. O annihilator of enemies! 
The strength which is in me or in you, is indeed not there in them at all."

"O intelligent one! Seeing the great strength, power and prowess of this monkey and keeping 
in view your own strength, exhibit your valour accordingly."

"Keeping in view your own strength and of the army, O the foremost among those employing 
missiles, exert yourself in such a way, that further destruction of our army may stop, the moment you, 
whose enemies have died, have arrived near Hanuma."

"O hero! The armies cannot protect you, even if they are in multitudes. There is no use 
taking a weapon like a strong thunder bolt against the monkey. There is no limit to the strength of 
Hanuma the son of wind-god. It is not possible to kill him, who resembles fire, by means of any weapon."

"Perceiving well the fact in this way and with your mind composed by the thought that 
success can be achieved by your own effort, and remembering the strength of arrows of your wonderful 
bow, go and duly proceed with your work, without any hindrance."

"This thought of my sending you is not indeed the best option. But, this decision is 
said to be according to the duties of a king and is the commendation of a warrior-class."

"O destroyer of enemies! You have to learn surely the skill to employ various weapons 
in battle. You have to aspire for a victory too in battle."

Hearing the words of his father, Indrajit the strong demon, possessing a power similar 
to that of gods, with an undepressed mind and with his intellect resolved to fight, performed a circumambulation 
in honour of Ravana the lord.

Acclaimed by the beloved people of his own class, Indrajit who was violent in battle 
then entered the battle-field with an accomplished enthusiasm.

Indrajit, the illustrious son of Ravana, having eyes like lotus-petals and endowed with 
extra ordinary energy, rushed forth like an ocean on full-moon days.

That Indrajit, alike Indra the lord of celestials, ascended a chariot with unchecked 
speed and yoked with four sharp-toothed tigers, having their swiftness similar to Garuda the king of 
eagles.

That Indrajit, the chariot-warrior, best among the wielders of bow, skilled in the use 
of weapons and excellent among those proficient in the use of missiles, went swiftly in his chariot 
to where Hanuma was.

Hearing the rattling sound of Indrajit's chariot and a twang of his bow, the heroic Hanuma 
became more thrilled with delight.

Indrajit, skilled in warfare, taking a very big bow with pointed arrows, went aiming 
towards Hanuma.

While that Indrajit who was energetic in battle, was going ahead to the combat, with 
a bow in his hand, all the quarters became gloomy and ferocious animals howled in many ways.

Nagas and Yakshas, great sages moving in astronomical circles, Siddhas and a multitude 
of birds going around the sky, gathered there and clamoured loudly with a great rejoice.

Seeing Indrajit coming swiftly with the chariot, Hanuma made a noise with great resonance 
and grew up his body speedily.

Ascending on his wonderful chariot and wielding a colourful bow, Indrajit on his part, 
stretched his bow, which made a glaring sound like that accompanying a stroke lightning.

Those two warriors, Hanuma and Indrajit, possessing great velocity and a great strength 
as also fearless in combat, confronted in the battle like Indra the Lord of celestials and Ravana the 
Lord of demons who tightened hostility with each other.

Hanuma, of immeasurable strength, having expanded his body, aborted the swiftness of 
arrows of that Indrajit, the great chariot-warrior, the wielder of a bow and well-renowned in battle. 
Hanuma wheeled about in the path of wind-god, his father.

Then, the heroic Indrajit, the destroyer of strong enemies, discharged long and sharp-pointed 
arrows, having beautiful feathers, provided with picturesque golden shafts, with good inclination and 
as swift as lightning.

Hearing the rattling sound of the chariot and the sound of wooden tomtoms, kettledrums 
and war-drums as also the sound of the bow-string being plucked, Hanuma sprang up again.

Making the total target of Indrajit who was skilled in hitting his target useless, Hanuma 
the great monkey swiftly wheeled about between the arrows.

Hanuma, the son of wind-god, again stayed in front of his arrows and stretching out his 
hands, sprang up.

Those two warriors, full of swiftness and skilled in their war-fare, staged an excellent 
battle, which captivated the minds of all beings.

Indrajit could not know the weakness of Hanuma, nor did Hanuma know the weakness of high-minded 
Indrajit. Those two warriors, who were equal in prowess to gods, coming into collision with each other, 
became unbearable to each other.

The aim of his arrows getting aborted and even his unfailing arrows falling down, the 
high-minded Indrajit, who was well-known for hitting his target, got hold of a great thought.

Keeping in view of that monkey being incapable of being slain, Indrajit, Ravana's son 
then formed an idea as to how to resort to capture of that Hanuma the chief of monkey-warriors.

That warrior, Indrajit, excellent among the knowers of missiles and possessing a great 
splendor, then fitted to his bow, a missile presided over by Brahma the creator.

Indrajit, who knows the true nature of missiles, feeling certain that he was incapable 
of being killed, bound that Hanuma, the son of wind-god, by that presided over by Brahma the creator.

Fastened with the weapon discharged by the demon, Hanuma became motionless and fell down 
on the ground.

Realizing that he had been bound by a missile presided over by Brahma the Lord of creation 
that Hanuma failing to keep his swiftness, considered it to be a favour of Brahma the creator done to 
him.

Knowing it to be a missile presided over by Brahma the creator and consecrated by spells 
sacred to Brahma, the creator, Hanuma then recollected a boon got by Lord Brahma, the grand father of 
the entire creation.

"I have no capacity to liberate from the bondage of the missile due to the power of Brahma 
the father of the world. Thus knowing the bondage, through the missile presided over by Brahma the self-born 
creator imposed by the enemy, it must be obeyed by me."

Thinking of the potency of the missile and the grace of Brahma, the grandfather of the 
entire creation enjoyed by him, and thinking about his capacity to liberate from it (which was going 
to alight on him after a while) that Hanuma obeyed the command of Brahma the grand father of the entire 
creation.

"Since I am being protected by Brahma, Indra and the wind-god, I do not have fear, eventhough 
I am fastened by the missile."

"Even if I were captured by the demons, a great advantage is foreseen. There will be 
a dialogue with Ravana. Therefore, let the enemies capture me."

That Hanuma, the destroyer of enemies and who acted after fully considering the pros 
and cons, ascertained his objective and stayed motionless. Approached and captured forcibly by the enemies 
as also frightened by them, he made a loud scream.

Seeing that Hanuma, the destroyer of enemies falling motionless, the demons then tied 
him with plaited chords of hemp and bark of trees.

Hanuma approved of being forcibly bound and reviled by the enemies, with an assured feeling 
that Ravana was curious as he was, to see him.

That powerful Hanuma, tied with those chords of hemp and bark, was relieved of the missile, 
since the bondage of that missile does not indeed coexist with another bondage.

Conceiving that Hanuma the foremost among the monkeys, bound with the bark of trees, 
as having been relieved of the missile, the heroic Indrajit, on his part, then became thoughtful as 
follows: "A person tied with other means cannot indeed be bound again by the missile."

"Alas! My great exploit has been rendered futile. The scope of the mystic formula has 
not been considered by the demons. Once the spell has been made ineffective, another missile cannot 
be operative. All of us became jeopardized."

Hanuma, liberated from the missile being dragged away by the demons and afflicted by 
the ties of ropes, could not realize that he was liberated from the missile.

That Hanuma, then being beaten with sticks and fists by the cruel demons, was dragged 
to the vicinity of Ravana.

Then, recognizing that Hanuma, tied with barks of trees and ropes, but liberated by the 
missile, Indrajit slowed that mighty Hanuma the jewel among the monkeys, to Ravana there sitting along 
with a body of his attendants.

The demons showed to Ravana, the king of demons that captured Hanuma, the jewel among 
the foremost of monkeys who looked like an elephant in rut.

So went round the following conversations from the heroic demons there: "Who is this 
being? Whose savant is he? Where has he come from? What is his pursuit? Who is his alley?"

Thereafter, some demons, highly enraged, said to one another as follows: "Let this monkey 
be killed, even roasted alive and devoured."

After crossing over the path swiftly, the high-souled Hanuma saw there the palace of 
Ravana, decorated with highly precious stones and his elderly attendants sitting at the feet of Ravana.

That Ravana, who was endowed with an extraordinary energy, saw Hanuma the foremost of 
monkeys, being dragged hither and thither by demons of ugly countenance.

Hanuma the jewel among the monkeys also saw Ravana the king of demons, charged with luster 
and strength and blazing like the sun.

That Ravana, rolling his red-hot eyes with rage by seeing that Hanuma and thereafter 
seeing his important ministers who were elder to his by clan and character sitting there, ordered them 
to interrogate Hanuma.

Questioned, as per order, by those ministers as to the purpose of his operation and the 
motive of his act, that Hanuma at the outset informed, "I came from Sugreeva as an envoy."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hanuma, the highly energetic son of wind-god, with an inducement to obtain confidence 
from Seetha, again modestly spoke the following words:

"O illustrious lady! I am a monkey and a messenger of the wise Rama. O princess! Look 
at this ring too, marked with Rama's name."

"I brought this ring given by the high souled Rama, for the purpose of gaining your confidence. 
Get consoled indeed. Happiness to you! You are now free from the object of your grief."

"I brought this ring given by the high souled Rama, for the purpose of gaining your confidence. 
Get consoled indeed. Happiness to you! You are now free from the object of your grief."

The countenance of that large-eyed Seetha, which appeared charming with red and white 
eyes shone like a moon the king of stars liberated by Rahu the demon. Then, that young Seetha, gladdened 
by the message of her husband, became shy and message of her husband, became shy and well-pleased. Uttering 
delightful words, she praised Hanuma the great monkey (as follows):

"O Hanuma the best of monkeys! You have singly overpowered this place infested by demons. 
You are valiant. You are competent. You are intelligent."

"You, with an acclaimable gallantry, crossed the ocean having a width of one hundred 
Yojanas and an asylum of crocodiles, making it as a small puddle."

"O excellent of monkeys! For you there is no fear nor even bewilderment from Ravana. 
Hence, I do not consider you as an ordinary monkey."

"O the best of monkeys! If you are sent by that Rama, who knows the nature of his self, 
you are worthy of talking to me well."

"The indomitable Rama must not have sent you indeed, especially to me, without knowing 
your enterprise and without testing you in advance."

"Rama the righteous man who is true to his promise and Lakshmana of great splendour who 
enriches the joy of Sumitra are fortunately safe."

"If Rama is safe, with his anger why is he not scorching the earth with ocean as its 
belt, like rising fire at the end of the world?"

"Otherwise, Rama and Lakshmana are capable of holding down even the celestials. But I 
think there is no end indeed to my troubles."

"Is not Rama getting perturbed? Is he not tormented with grief? Is Rama the best of men 
now doing the right acts to annihilate the enemies?"

"Is Rama the prince miserable and confused? Is he even mistaken in his actions? I hope 
he is doing all acts which require human effort."

"Is Rama the annihilator of enemies as per necessity resorting to the two strategies 
viz., conciliatory and partaking approaches and even the three strategies viz., partaking, sowing dissension 
and open assault? Is he kind-hearted towards friends, with a wish to conquer the enemies?"

"Is he getting friends? Has he been approached for friendship by others? I hope he is 
having good friends and even so honoured by them."

"Is Rama the prince wishing the grace of the gods? Is he equally aware of the role of 
human endeavour and the role of fate?"

"O Hanuma! Is Rama not losing affection in me because of my staying away from home? Will 
he release me from this evil predicament?"

"Is Rama, who is habituated always to pleasures and not habituated to pains, not sinking 
into despondency by now getting this great pain?"

"Are you constantly hearing the news of safety of Kausalya, Sumitra and Bharata?"

"Is Rama worthy of honour, suffering from pain just because of me? Will he liberate me 
from my sorrow, without fixing his mind on something else?"

"I hope Bharata, having a brotherly affection, will send for my sake, an army furnished 
with banners, guarded by the ministers, consisting of ten anikinis (21870 elephants, 21870 chariots, 
65610 horses and 109350 foot soldiers) which were terrific in appearance."

"The glorious Sugreeva the lord of monkeys will indeed come for my sake along with his 
valiant monkeys, who have their tusks and nails as their weapons."

"Lakshmana, the strong man, who augments the joy of Sumitra and who is an expert in weaponry, 
will indeed destroy the demons by the multitude of his arrows."

"Within a short time, I hope see Ravana killed along with his companions in the battle-field 
by terrific weapons burning brightly."

"That face of Rama with its golden and with the fragrance of a lotus may be looking miserable 
as bereft of me and getting dehydrated too. I hope it is not parched by the sun, like a louts."

"Which Rama left the kingdom as an indication of his righteousness and to whom there 
was neither disturbance nor fear nor sorrow even while taking me to the forest by foot, I hope that 
the same Rama is maintaining boldness in his heart."

"To Rama, in the matter of affection, neither his mother nor his father nor any body 
else is equal to or more than me. O Hanuma the messenger! I wish to survive only as long as I hear the 
activity of my beloved."

Uttering thus those greatly meaningful and sweetly worthwhile words, Seetha the princess 
further abstained from talking so as to hear Hanuma's delightful words describing the matters pertaining 
to Rama.

Hearing Seetha's words, Hanuma of terrific prowess, keeping his joined palms on his head, 
spoke the following words in reply.

"O Seetha having lotus eyes! Rama does not know that you are here. For that reason, he 
did not take you back soon, as Indra the destroyer of strong holds did not take back Sachi, his wife."

"Soon after hearing my words, Rama will come soon, drawing forth a large army, consisting 
of a multitude of monkeys and bears."

"Rama will paralyze the imperturbable ocean with his flood of arrows and make the City 
of Lanka extinguished of demons."

"If the goddess of Death along with demons or celestials stand firmly in the way of Rama 
at that time, he will kill them also."

"O noble lady! Being full of grief caused by your non-appearance, that Rama is not obtaining 
happiness, like an elephant tornmented by a lion."

"O Seetha the princess! I swear and tell you by the mountains Malaya, Vindhya, Meru and 
Dardura as well as by our staple food of roots and fruits, that you will soon see Rama's face, having 
good eyes, handsome, having lips with the colour of a bright-red gourd (fruit of Momordica monodelpha) 
and with its charming look like a rising full moon."

"O Seetha! You will see soon Rama on the Prasravana mountain, like Indra the Lord of 
celestials seated on the back of Airavata, the chief of elephants."

"Rama is not eating meat, nor indulging even in spirituous liquor. Everyday, in the evening, 
he is eating the food existing in the forest, well arranged for him."

"With his mind wholly devoted to you, Rama is not even driving away forest-flies from 
his body, nor mosquitoes nor insects nor reptiles from his body."

"Rama always cogitates on something or the other. He is forever engaged in sorrow. He 
is enamoured with the god of love and thinks of nothing else."

"Rama mostly does not have sleep. Even if that best of men sleeps, he keeps awake uttering 
sweet words like "lo! Behold! Seetha!"

"When he happens to see a fruit or a flower or any other beautiful object, he recollects 
of you and says 'O beloved!' many times and breathes a sigh."

"O Seetha the princess! Rama the magnanimous prince is always lamenting, speaking just 
about you, recollecting "Seetha, Seetha!". Being firm in his vow, he makes effort to find you only."

"That Seetha, who has the same amount of grief as that of Rama, became worn out of her 
grief upon hearing the adoration of Rama, like a night with the moon obscured by the remnant clouds 
at the commencement of autumn."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing and sustaining that the five army-generals along with their followers and vehicles 
were disposed off by Hanuma, Ravana looked at Aksha, his son, violent in combat and who was inclined 
to fighting as well as sitting in front of him.

Goaded by the looks of Ravana, the energetic Aksha, wielding a golden dotted bow, quickly 
sprang up, like a fire switched up by the foremost of brahmins in a sacrificial fire, by offering oblations 
to it.

Mounting a great chariot, having a splendour of a newly risen sun and overlaid with a 
protective armour of highly refined gold, that valiant cheif of demons sallied forth towards that mighty 
monkey.

Aksha's chariot was earned through many kinds of his penances. It was shining with a 
protective armour of highly refined gold, adorned with a flag on a flag-staff studded with gems and 
yoked well with eight excellent horses, having speed equal to that of a mind.

That chariot was unassailable by celestials or demons. It moved without hindrance to 
any place. It shone like a sun and could move within the sky. It was well-conceived with a quiver, eight 
swords and tied with bells. It was orderly arranged with spears and lances in their respective places.

Then, Aksha having a prowess equal to that of celestials, came forth, mounting that chariot 
decorated with golden wreaths, having a brilliance of moon and sun, filled with every right thing and 
shining like rays of sun.

Aksha, filling the sky earth and its mountains with sounds of horses elephants and chariots, 
together with his army, approached the efficient Hanuma the great monkey, standing at the archy door-way.

Approaching that Hanuma, standing there readily to destroy mortals, similar to a fire 
that is to destroy the world, the yellow-eyed Aksha was bewildered, born of a surprise and looked to 
him with a great esteem.

That Aksha, the mighty prince, assessing the swiftness of that high-souled Hanuma and 
his prowess with regard to his adversaries as also his own strength, increased his body more and more 
like the sun when the frost is faded away.

Understanding Hanuma's prowess to be unrestrainable and stable in battle, that Aksha, 
exhibiting anger initially, became stable and mentally composed and incited Hanuma to battle by discharging 
three sharp arrows towards him.

Recognizing that Hanuma, as a haughty monkey, after having gallantly conquered his adversaries 
and accustomed to fatigue, that Aksha, graspign the bow and arrows his hand, saw him with an excited 
mind.

Having a glden chain, a pair of armlets and charming ear-rings, Aksha of a swift prowess, 
approached Hanuma. Their unmatched get-together in combat became a baffle to even the celestials and 
demons.

Seeing that battle between Hanuma and Aksha, the earth uproared. The sun did not shine 
brightly. The wind ceased to blow. The mountain shook. The sky made a reverberant sound. The ocean too 
was agitated.

Then, that eminent demon, who correctly knew how to fix his gaze on the target, to fit 
an arrow to the bow and to discharge it, hurled on Hanuma's head, three arrows which were well-painted, 
having golden shafts and feathers and which resembled venomous serpants.

Oozing the blood from his wound caused by those arrows descended into his head (by Aksha), 
looking like the newly risen sun, his eyes bathed in blood rolling rapidly, Hanuma shone brightly like 
the sun surrounded by a circle of rays, having the arrows as its rays.

Seeing in the battle that Aksha the prince, with his marvellous weapons and picturesque 
bow, that Hanuma the excellent one among Sugree's counsellors, was rejoiced and with an inclination 
to fight, grew in size.

That Hanuma, endowed with strength and prowess, resembling the sun appearing on a peak 
of Mandara muntain and whose anger was increased, then burnt the prince Aksha along with his army and 
vehicles, by the rays of fire emnating from his eyes.

That demon in the form of a cloud, raining down arrows, then wielding a bow in the form 
of a rain-bow, soon discharged arrows on Hanuma standing in the form of a mountain, like a cloud showering 
rain on a high mountain.

Seeing that Aksha the prince, possessing an impetuous valour, endowed with enhanced splendour 
strength and vigour with a capacity to move within the sky like a cloud, coming to the battle, Hanuma 
roared with joy.

Boastful of his valour in battle because of his childish attitude, Aksha wit an enhanced 
fury and red-blood eyes, approached Hanuma who was incomparable in battle, as an elephant approaching 
a well covered with heaps of straw.

As Aksha forcefully discharged his arrows, Hanuma roared a sound of thunder and bounced 
quickly to the sky assuming a terrible sight, stretching out his arms and thighs.

That strong and valiant Aksha, the foremost among the demons, and the best among car 
warriors, went chasing Hanuma who was flying upwards, difusing arrows like a cloud showering hail-stones 
on a mountian.

That valiant Hanuma, whose swiftness was equal to the mind and possessing impetuous valour 
in battle, rushing forth like wind in the space between one arrow and another and thus escaping Aksha's 
arrows, moved in the path visited by wind (the sky).

With a respectful faculty of sight, Hanuma saw that Aksha who was wielding his bow and 
readily inclined to fight, covering the entire sky with excellent arrows with various types of tops 
and became thoughful.

Then, the mighty armed Hanuma, who knew how to act under particular circumstances, roaring 
when pierced in the breast with shafts by the high souled heroic, Aksha, reflected on the prowess of 
his adversary in battle.

"The mighty Aksha, possessing the lustre of a rising sun, is performing a great act, 
as a mature youth. My mind is not conceding here to kill him, who is distinguished in all acts of war-fare."

"He possesses a great intellect and is also prominent by his valour. He is well-composed 
and highly tolerant in battle. Due to his eminent deeds and virtues, he is undoubtedly adored by saints, 
Nagas the serpent-demons and Yakshas the semi-dviine being."

"He is standing very much before me and looks me straight in the eyes, reassured as he 
is, by his prowess and enthusiasm. His swift-moving prowess trembles even the minds of celestials and 
demons."

'If neglected, he would undoubtedly overpower me. His prowess is getting augmented in 
battle. The only option left out for me is to kill him now. It is not proper to neglect a spreadin fire."

The valiant and te mighty Hanuma, reflecting thus about the swiftness of the adersary 
and determining his own couse of action, then acquired a course of action, then acquired a momentum 
and also made up his mind to kill him.

That Hanuma, the heroic son of wind, killed using the blows of his palm, those eight 
horses posessing a great speed in the path of sky with alertness as also having a capacity to bear burden 
while turning to different directions.

Then, the great chariot of Aksha, thus struck by the palm and subdued by Hanuma the counsellor 
of Sugreeva, had its interior broken, its carriage pole loosened and its horses dead and fallen from 
the sky to the ground.

Leaving the chariot, wielding the bow and sword, that Aksha the chariot-warrior leapt 
to the sky. Having a terrible power of penance and leaving his body like a sage, he then was seen departing 
to heaven because of his Yogic penance.

Thereafter, Hanuma with his prowess equal to that of wind, approaching Aksha moving in 
the sky, which is often frequented by Garuda the eagle, the wind and Siddhas the ascetics endowed with 
supernatural powers, slowly grasped his feet firmly.

That Hanuma, with a prowess equal to that of wind-god, his father, and the excellent 
one among monkeys, spigning round Aksha like grasping a great serpent an eagle for a thousand times 
in the battle, hurled him down to the floor rapidly.

With his arms, thighs, hips and neck broken, blood dripping, his bones and eyes crushed, 
his joints displaced and his sinews shattered, that demon was killed by Hanuma.

Hanuma, having crushed him on the ground, created a great fear to Ravana. Aksha, thus 
having been killed, Hanuma was gazed on with excessive astonishment by great sages who move everywhere 
without obstruction and having great voes as also by spirits Yakshas the semidivine beings, Pannagas 
the serpent-demons and by celestials with Indra the lord of celestials.

Killing that Aksha, possessing a lustre equal to that of Jayanta the son of Indra the 
lord of celestials and having his eyes resembling blood, the heroic Hanuma reached the same archy door 
way again, like Yama the lord of death expecting in a moment any mortal getting destroyed by him.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Then, after giving the jewel for head, Seetha spoke to Hanuma as follows: "This token 
of remembrance is actually known to Rama."

"By seeing this jewel, the heroic Rama can recollect three of us, viz. my mother, myself 
and the king Dasaratha."

"O Hanuma the excellent among monkeys! Driven by your enthusiasm again, think what remains 
to be done in undertaking this task."

"O Hanuma the best among monkeys! You are capable of fulfilling this task. O Hanuma! 
Become the one who can remove my misfortunes, by employing your effort. If you think of it carefully, 
your effort will become the one which can remove my misfortunes."

That Hanuma of terrific prowess, having promised 'so be it', offered salutation to Seetha 
by bowing his head to her and was set off to go.

Getting to know Hanuma ready to set out, Seetha the princess spoke the following words 
with her voice choked by tears.

"O Hanuma, the excellent among monkeys! Ask about the welfare of both Rama and Lakshmana 
together. You also ask, according to our usage, about the welfare of Sugreeva together with his ministers 
and of all the monkeys who are elder."

"You deserve to evolve a strategy through which the long-armed Rama can make me to cross 
over this ocean of misfortunes."

"O Hanuma! Tell, in whatever manner, by which the illustrious Rama can console me, even 
while I am still surviving. Reap righteousness, by helping me through your word."

"Constantly hearing the words endowed with energy spoken by you, Rama's manly strength 
will be intensified to recover me."

'Hearing the words containing my message from you, the valiant Rama will duly set his 
heart in exercising his strength."

Hearing the words of Seetha, Hanuma the son of wind-god, having placed his open hands 
side by side, slightly shallowed on his head in salutation), spoke the following words in reply.

"Coming soon together with valiant monkeys and bears, Rama after defeating the enemies 
in battle, will eliminate your sorrow."

"While discharging his arrows, none can be seen either in men or in monkeys or in celestials 
who are able to stand before Rama in battle."

"That Rama is capable of enduring even the sun-god, even Indra the god of rain or even 
Yama the god of death, son of the sun-god a battle-field especially for your sake."

"Rama is indeed worthwhile to master the entire earth bounded by the ocean. O Seetha! 
Rama's victory is indeed for your sake."

Hearing those words of Hanuma, spoken rightly and truly well, Seetha held him in great 
respect and proceeded to speak (the following) words:

Thereupon, looking again and again towards that Hanuma who was going away, Seetha kind-heartedly 
adored his words endowed with friendliness for her husband.

"O valiant monkey, the annihilator of enemies! If you are agreeable, stay for a day at 
any one secret place. After taking rest, you can go tomorrow."

"O Hanuma! Because of your vicinity, there may be a relief for a moment to this great 
sorrow of me, who is less fortunate."

"O Hanuma the lion among the monkeys! If after that, there is any doubt about your return, 
there is a doubt even for my survival too. There is no suspicion about this matter."

'O Hanuma! To me, who is tormented by one grief after another grief, my sorrow due to 
your disappearance will further torment me, like a burning flame."

"O best among the monkeys! O valiant one! In the matter of monkeys and bears who are 
your helpmates, this highly great doubt is lingering before me."

"How indeed can those troops of monkeys and bears or Rama and Lakshmana can cross that 
great insurmountable ocean?"

"Three beings viz. Garuda the eagle, or yourself or the wind-god only have the capacity 
of crossing this ocean."

"O valiant monkey! That is why, what strategy are you visualizing to fulfill this act, 
which is thus impassable? You are indeed excellent of those who know how to accomplish a task.

"O Hanuma the annihilator of hostile enemies! You, as one alone, is capable of fulfilling 
this task. Your act of fulfilling the result is well-known."

"If Rama defeats Ravana with his entire army in battle and as a champion takes me back 
to his own city, it will be quite worthy of him."

"If Rama, the destroyer of rival army, fills the entire Lanka with his arrows and takes 
me home, it will be quite worthy of him."

"For that reason, you act in such a way, that Rama the high-souled man, valiant in battle, 
may exhibit the prowess befitting of him."

Hearing those words, which were meaningful humble and attended with reason, Hanuma gave 
his final reply (as follows)

"O Seetha the princess! Sugreeva, the Lord of the troops of monkeys and bears and the 
premost among the monkeys, who is endowed with strength, is firmly determined in your cause."

"O Seetha! That Sugreeva, endowed with thousands and crores of monkeys, will come soon 
to destroy the demons."

"So many monkeys, endowed with prowess, perseverance, great strength and who can rush 
to any place as they wish are intensely committed to Sugreeva's command.

"There is no hindrance to their movement either in the sky or in the ground or in any 
horizontal region (between the sky and the ground) with unlimited splendour are not indolent in performing 
any great task."

"The earth with its oceans and mountains has been circumambulated clockwise many times 
by those monkeys, who are highly energetic and who follow the aerial path."

"In them, some of the monkeys are superior to me and some are even equal to me. No one 
in the vicinity of Sugreeva is inferior to me."

"When I have arrived here, why to talk about the mighty ones? Generally, superior ones 
are not sent for errands. Only others are indeed sent."

"O Seetha the princess! Enough of your lamentation. Take away your sorrow. Those leaders 
of monkeys will reach Lanka by one single leap."

"Rama and Lakshmana, those two lions among men also of great strength, ascending on my 
shoulders, can come to you, like the rising sun and the moon."

"Coming together, Rama and Lakshmana the valiant and the excellent among men, can destroy 
the City of Lanka with their arrows."

"O Seetha with a good waist! Rama, the delight of Raghu dynasty, killing Ravana together 
with his troops, will return to his town, duly taking you with him."

"For that reason, console yourself indeed! Happiness to you! If you wait for some time, 
you shall see, within a short time, Rama like a blazing fire."

"When this king of demons is killed along with his sons, ministers and relatives, you 
will meet Rama, as Rohini* met the moon."

"O Seetha the princess! You shall see the end of your sorrow soon. Within a short time, 
you will also see the end of Ravana, as destroyed by Rama."

Thus consoling Seetha, Hanuma the son of wind-god made up his mind to go back and spoke 
to Seetha again as follows:

"That Rama the annihilator of enemies, who firmly decided to destroy his adversaries 
and Lakshmana wielding a bow in his hand will soon reach the entrance of Lanka and you will see them."

"You can see soon those valiant monkeys, with their claws and tusks as weapons, having 
the prowess of lions and tigers and looking like lordly elephants, coming together."

"O venerable lady! You shall see many troops of excellent monkeys resembling hills and 
clouds, thundering on the peaks of Malaya mountain in Lanka."

"Hit in the vitals by the darts of venerable Manmatha the god of love, Rama is not obtaining 
happiness, as an elephant gets tormented by a lion."

"O Seetha the princess! Do not weep with grief. Let your mind be without any unpleasantness. 
You are indeed having Rama your husband as your protector like Shachi having Indra her husband as a 
protector."

"Who else is there greater than Rama or who else equal to Lakshmana? Those two brothers, 
like fire and wind, are supportive to you."

"O Seetha the princess! You will not stay for long at this place, which is very terrific 
and occupied with a multitude of demons. The arrival of your husband will not be delayed. Be patient 
till the moment of my meeting with Rama on my return."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Hearing that narration about Rama from Hanuma the excellent of monkeys, Seetha in a sweet voice 
spoke the following gentle words:

"Where was your contact with Rama? How do you know Lakshmana? How did the union between monkeys 
and men arise?"

"O Hanuma! What are the characteristics of Rama and Lakshmana? Narrate them to me, so that sorrow 
will not take possession of me again."

"Of what kind was the appearance of that Rama and of Lakshmana? Of what kind was their form? How 
were the thighs? How were the arms? Tell me."

Hearing the words of Seetha, Hanuma, the son of wind-god, then started to describe Rama according 
to his actual state (as follows):

"O Seetha having eyes resembling lotus leaves! By my fortune, you are enquiring about the appearance 
of Rama your husband and Lakshmana, eventhough you know about them. Alas! what a pleasure!"

"O the large eyed Seetha! I tell the characteristics of Rama and Lakshmana as I recognized them; 
hear them from me."

"O Seetha the daughter of Janaka! Rama has his eyes resembling the petals of a lotus. He has a 
handsomeness, attracting the hearts of all living beings. He is endowed with grace and dexterity, by birth."

"He is equal to the sun in splendour, earth in endurance, Brihaspati in intelligence and Indra 
in fame."

"Rama the tormentator of his adversaries, is a protector of the world of beings, further protecting 
his own people. He is the protector of his own behaviour and righteousness.

"O Seetha! Rama is the protector of the four castes of the world. He is the doer and also the agent 
for the people's propriety of conduct."

"Rama is a resplendent man. He is respected exceedingly. He is established in a vow of chastity. 
He knows how to do good to virtuous people. He knows the application and advantage of his actions."

"He is well trained in statesmanship. He honours brahmins, the priestly class. He possesses sacred 
knowledge. He is endowed with good conduct. He is a modest man. He torments his adversaries."

"He got trained in Yajurveda, the sacrificial Veda. He is highly honoured by those well-versed 
in Vedas. He is skilled in Dhanurveda, the science of archery, other Vedas and the six limbs* of Vedangas."

"O princess! Rama is a broad shouldered and a long-armed man. He has a shell-like neck. He has 
a handsome countenance. He has a hidden collar-bone. He has beautiful red eyes. His fame is heard about by people."

"He has a voice like the sound of a kettle-drum. He has a shining skin. He is full of splendour. 
He is square-built. His limbs are built symmetrically. He is endowed with a dark-brown complexion."

"He is ever firm in three limbs (viz. the breast, waist and fist), long in three (viz. the breast, 
waist and fist), long in three (viz. the eyebrows, arms and soles), uniform in three (viz. his locks, testical 
and knees, elevated in three (viz. his breast, rim of his navel and lower abdomen), coppery in three of the navel 
and the lower abdomen), coppery in three (viz. the rims of his eyes, nails, palms and soles), soft in three (viz. 
the lines on his soles, hair and the end of the membrane virile) and always deep in three (viz. the voice, gait 
and the navel)."

"He has three folds in the skin of his neck and belly. He is depressed at three places (viz. the 
middle of his soles, the lines on his soles and the nipples). He is undersized at four places (viz. the neck, 
membran virile, the back and the shanks). He is endowed with three spirals in the hair of his head. He has four 
lines at the root of his thumb (denoting his proficiency in the four Vedas). He has four lines on his forehead 
(indicating longevity). He is four cubits high (96 inches). He has four pairs of limbs (viz. the cheeks, arms, 
shanks and knees) equally matched."

"He has fourteen other pairs of limbs (viz. the eye brows, nostrils, eyes, ears, lips, nipples, 
elbows, wrists, knees testicles, lions, hands, feet and thighs) equally matched. The four large teeth at both 
the ends of his upper and lower jaws are very sharp. He walks in four gaits (resembling the walks of a lion, a 
tiger, an elephant and a bull). He is endowed with excellent lips, chin and nose. He has five glossy limbs (viz. 
the hair, eyes, teeth, skin and soles). He has eight long limbs (viz. the arms, fingers and toes, eyes and ears, 
thighs and shanks).

"Rama has ten lotus-like limbs (viz. the countenance, the mouth, the eyes, the tongue, lips, palate, 
breasts, nails, the hands and the feet). He has ten ample limbs (viz. the chest, the head, the forehead, the neck, 
the arms, the heart, the mouth the feet, the back and the ears). He is spread through by reason of three (viz. 
splendour, renown and glory). He is doubly pure (on father's and mother's side). He is elevated in six limbs (viz. 
the flanks, the abdomen, the breast, the nose, the shoulders and the forehead). He is small, thin, fine or sharp 
in nine (viz. the hair, the moustaches and the beard, nails the hair on the body, the skin, the finger-joints, 
the membrum virile, acumen and perception). He pursues religious merit, worldly riches and the sensuous delight 
in three periods (viz. the forenoon, midday and afternoon).

"Rama is engrossed in truth and righteousness. He is a prosperous man. He is interested in reception 
and facilitation. He knows how to apportion place and time. He speaks affectionately with all."

"The invincible Lakshmana, the son of Rama's step-mother and Rama's brother, is resembling Rama 
in appearance, affection and in qualities."

"Rama and Lakshmana, the two tigers among men, very anxiously desirous of seeing you and searching 
all over the earth, came in contact with us."

"Those two brothers Rama and Lakshmana, wandering only in search of you all over the earth, saw 
Sugreeva the Lord of monkeys, sitting on the top of Rishyamuka mountain, filled with several trees, having been 
dethroned by his elder brother, oppressed with fear, but who was pleasant to the sight."

"We for one are serving that Sugreeva, the Lord of monkeys, who was true to his promise, but was 
dethroned from the kingdom from his elder brother."

"In the meanwhile, those two brothers Rama and Lakshmana, wearing clothes made of bark and arming 
the best bows, came to the charming place of Rishyamuka mountain."

"Seeing Rama and Lakshmana, the excellent of men, coming with bows in hand, that Sugreeva the best 
of monkeys was deluded with fear and jumped over to the hill-top of that mountain."

"Thereafter, stationed on that hill-top, that Sugreeva the lord of monkeys, very soon sent me only, 
to approach those two brothers."

"On that command of Sugreeva, I reached saluting those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana the excellent 
and capable men, endowed with good form and characteristics."

"Those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, the excellent among men, were fully endowed with kindness, 
after knowing the exact position about Sugreeva. Then, I made Rama and Lakshmana to ascend on my back and took 
them to Sugreeva's place."

"I informed the high-souled Sugreeva about the true position of Rama and Lakshmana. After a mutual 
conversation between those two brothers and Sugreeva, a great friendship developed among them."

"Thus endowed with friendship, Sugreeva the lord of monkeys and Rama the best of men, by talking 
together of their earlier occurrences, developed mutual confidence."

"Thereafter, that Rama the elder brother of Lakshmana, through the extremely effulgent Vali the 
brother of Sugreeva, consoled Sugreeva who was earlier expelled from the kingdom; (by Vali), for the sake of Ruma 
a woman."

"Then, Lakshmana informed Sugreeva the king of monkeys about the sadness of Rama, (who is unwearied 
in action), born out of your disappearance."

"Hearing the words of Lakshmana, Sugreeva then became highly dim-witted, as the sun becomes dim 
when overpowered by an eclipse."

"Thereafter, all those multitude of ornaments which adorned your body, which were being tried to 
be be snatched away by Ravana and which were dropped on to the earth, were brought by monkey-leaders joyfully 
and shown to Rama. But the monkey-leaders did not know the further course of your movement."

"I indeed brought those ornaments near to Rama and gave them to him. Then, soon after receiving 
them, Rama lost his consciousness and the resounding ornaments were scattered all over."

"That Lord Rama looking like god, kept those beautiful ornaments of yours in his flank and lamented 
in many ways."

"While seeing those ornaments, Rama was lamenting and getting suffocated again and again. Thus, 
those ornaments ignited the fire of Rama's grief."

"That grief-stricken mighty man was thus lying on the floor for a long time. Then, with great difficulty, 
I made him to get up by telling several consoling words."

"That long-armed Rama, along with Lakshmana, after seeing those ornaments, examined them, again 
and again. He later gave them to Sugreeva."

"O the kind mistress! As you were being unseen, Rama was tormented forever with a great flaming 
fire of grief, like a volcano."

"For your sake, insomnia, grief and worry were tormenting that great souled Rama, as flames torment 
a burning house."

"By the grief caused by your not being seen, Rama is trembled with grief, as a high mountain is 
trembled by a great earthquake."

"O princess! In not seeing you, Rama is not obtaining delight, even while moving in quite charming 
forests, encompassing rivers and water-falls."

"O Seetha the daughter of Janaka! That Rama the excellent of men will receive you, soon after, 
killing Ravana along with Ravana's friends and relatives."

"That day when Rama and Sugreeva were together, both of them made an agreement that Rama would 
annihilate Vali and Sugreeva would arrange for a search of you."

"Thereafter, Rama and Lakshmana the two valiant princes reached Kishkindha. Rama killed Vali the 
king of monkeys there in a combat."

"After killing Vali in combat by means of his strength, Rama made Sugreeva the king for the entire 
multitude of bears and monkeys."

"O princess! A friendship was held well in such a manner between Rama and Sugreeva. Know me as 
Hanuma, who came here as a messenger on behalf of both of them."

"Having got his own kingdom, Sugreeva summoned for mighty as well as capable monkeys and sent them 
to ten different directions in search of you."

"As commanded by Sugreeva of a great splendour and the king of monkeys, those monkeys resembling 
Himalayan mountains, started out on all directions of the earth."

"Then, we along with other monkeys too who are eager to fulfill the command of Sugreeva, are wandering 
the entire earth in search of you."

"An excellent monkey named Angada, possessed of fortune, son of Vali and having great strength, 
taking one third of army along with him, set out in search of you."

"A number of days and nights passed, filled as we were with grief, having got lost our way intensely 
in a mountain-range called Vindhya."

"We were determined to forsake our lives because of despair in our non-fulfillment of work, in 
our overstepping of time-limit given by Sugreeva and in fear of the King Sugreeva."

"Having searched in places difficult of access in forests, at mountains and at cascades and not 
obtaining any indication of you the princess, we were ready to give up our lives."

"O Seetha! Seeing all the excellent monkeys sitting down and calmly awaiting for the approach of 
death, Angada was very much immerssed in the ocean of sorrow and lamented about your loss, the killing of Vali, 
the death of Jatayu and our practice of calmly awaiting for the approach of death in simply sitting down."

"For us who lost all our hopes on our lives and willing to give up our lives as per the command 
of Sugreeva, as though for the sake of our need alone, a great valiant bird came there."

"Hearing about the killing of his brother, the vulture-king Sampati the brother of slain Jatayu 
the King of vultures spoke (the following) words in anger:

"O the best of monkeys! Tell me who, where and how my younger brother Jabali was killed and made 
to fall."

"Then, Angada told Sampati a detailed account of events which led tot he killing of that great 
bird at Janasthana, by a demon of terrific form, for your sake."

"O Seetha with an excellent waist! Hearing about the slaughter of Jatayu, that Sampati the son 
of Aruna was very much pained and said that you were staying in Ravana's house."

"Hearing those delightful words of Sampati, we with our Chief Angada started soon from there."

"The monkeys were very much delighted and satisfied. They were making up their energy to see you, 
rose up from Vindhya mountain and reached the northern shore of the ocean."

"All the monkeys with their Chief Angada, in their anxiety to see you, reached the ocean. They 
were frightened after seeing the ocean there and they were again worried."

"Thereafter, seeing the ocean, I removed the serious fears of the army of monkeys who were worrying 
and crossed hundred Yojanas across the sea."

"Entering even Lanka, filled with demons in the night, I saw Ravana and you too who were immersed 
in grief."

"O the faultless princess! I told you all this as actually occurred. I am the messenger of Rama. 
Talk to me."

"O princess! I made an effort on Rama's behalf and came here for your sake. I am Sugreeva's minister. 
I am the son of wind-god. Know me, as such."

"You Rama, the excellent man among all the wielders of bow, is safe. Lakshmana, who is engaged 
in the service of his elder brother and possessing good characteristics, is also safe."

"O princess! I, who am interested in the welfare of the valiant Rama, your husband, came here alone 
on the command of Sugreeva."

"I, who can change my form at will, desirous of finding out your access, wandering alone without 
any helper, came to this southern direction."

"I shall remove the anguish of the army of monkeys who are lamenting because of your disappearance 
by informing them about my coming close to you because of my good fortune!"

"O princess! By my fortune, my crossing of ocean has not gone in vain. I can get this fame of having 
seen you because of my good luck."

"The highly valiant Rama, by killing Ravana the Lord of demons along with his friends and relatives, 
will obtain you soon."

"O Seetha! There is a mountain called Malyavan, which is the best among mountains. From there, 
a monkeys called Kesari went to another mountain called Gokarna."

"As prayed by gods and seers, that great monkey called Kesari, my father killed a demon named Shambasadana 
at a sacred shrine near the sea-shore."

"O Seetha! I am born in the womb of the wife of that Kesari the monkey, by the grace of the wind-god. 
By my activity alone, I am renowned as Hanuma in this world."

"O Seetha! I described the qualities of Rama, your husband, to cause trust in you. O the faultless 
princess! Rama will take you from here within a short time."

Thus inspired by confidence because of the above reasons, Seetha emaciated with grief, by adequate 
clues served as proof.

Seetha obtained unequal delight. She released tears of joy from her eyes having curved eye-lashes, 
with a thrill of delight.

The countenance of that large-eyed Seetha, who is beautiful, whose eyes are red white and long 
is shining like a moon, the king of stars liberated from Rahu the demon.

Seetha considered Hanuma clearly as a monkey and not otherwise. Thereafter Hanuma replied to her 
who is pleasant to the sight (as follows)

"O Seetha! I told you indeed all this please be consoled. Tell me what I can do for you and also 
what is agreeable to you. I am going back now."

"O Seetha! As provoked by the sages, Kesari, the valiant monkey killed a demon called Shambasadana 
in battle. I am a monkey born through wind-god and through his influence I am equal to the wind-god in strength."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Thereafter, the mighty monkeys, headed by Hanuma and others, experienced a great joy 
on that summit of Mount Mahendra.

Then, Jambavan, thrilling with rapture, asked the delighted Hanuma, the great monkey 
about the particulars of that actual occurrence (of seeing Seetha) as follows

"How did you see Seetha? How was she there? How was that Ravana of terrible deeds behaving 
towards her?"

"O Hanuma! Tell us entirely, in truth whatever has occurred. Ascertaining the truth, 
from you, we shall again think about what decision to be taken further."

"When we go there (to the presence of Rama), having prudence, tell us clearly which matter 
is to be disclosed and which matter is to be kept off from him."

Thus commanded by Jambavan, Hanuma, with his hair standing on end mentally offered his 
salutation to Seetha, the princess, by bowing his head and replied as follows:

"With an intention to reach the southern shore of the ocean, I leapt into the sky, indeed 
before your presence, from the summit of Mount Mahendra."

"While I was going, a terrific hindrance occurred in my way as it was. I saw a golden 
mountain-peak which was so charming and fascinating."

"I accounted that mountain staying turned towards the path, as an impediment. Approaching 
that excellent charming and golden mountain, I made up my mind to shatter it."

"As I struck it with my tail, the mountain-peak of that great hill, resembling the sun, 
was broken into a thousand pieces."

"Understanding my purpose, that great mountain spoke the following sweet words saying, 
'O my son!', As though it was refreshing my mind (once more to proceed further)."

" 'Know me to be generally called as Mynaa dwelling in this great ocean, as a companion 
of the wind-god and even as your father's brother'."

" 'O my son! Long ago, the foremost among the mountains used to have wings. They used 
to wander the entire earth freely, hurting the people!"

" 'Hearing that behaviour of those mountains, the venerable Indra the lord of celestials, 
the destroyer of a demon called Paka, chopped their wings into a thousand pieces by using his thunderbolt.' 
"

" 'O child! I, on my part, was hurled into the great ocean by the high-souled wind-god, 
your father and was liberated from the clutches of Indra.' "

" 'O Hanuma the annihilator of enemies! I have to behave in such a way as to help Rama. 
For, Rama, having a prowess equal to that of Indra; is indeed excellent in supporting righteousness.'"

"Hearing the words of that high-souled Mynaka and after informing my purpose, my mind 
was prepared for a further travel. The high-soled Mynaka also allowed me to depart."

"That Mynaka mountain vanished in the guise of a beautiful form of a human being. That 
large mountainous form also later drowned into the great ocean."

"Thereafter, employing an excellent speed and continuing on my course, I proceeded in 
that path speedily for a long time."

"Thereafter, I saw Surasa, the mother of serpents in the midst of the sea. That goddess 
spoke the following words to me.

"O excellent of monkeys! The celestials have shown you as my eatable. Therefore, I will 
eat you since you have been bestowed to me by gods after a long time."

"Hearing Surasa's words, I stood there, offering salutation with my joined palms to her. 
Becoming pale-faced, I spoke the following words:

" 'Rama, the son of Dasaratha the splendid man and the tormentator of enemies, together 
with Lakshmana, his brother and Seetha entered the forest of Dandaka.'"

" 'The evil-minded Ravana took away Seetha, Rama's wife. By the orders of Rama, I am 
going to her as an envoy.' "

"'You, abiding in Rama's country, ought to do a help to Rama. Otherwise, after seeing 
Seetha and Rama, who is unwearied in action, I will come to your mouth. I am thus promising you in truth."

Hearing my words, that Surasa who can assume any form at her will said: "No one can violate 
me by unfaithfulness. I have this boon with me."

"Hearing the words of Surasa, I, as tall as ten Yojanas (eighty miles), within a moment, 
grew half as much in size (fifteen Yojanas or one hundred twenty miles)."

"She opened her mouth so wide as to correspond to the size of my body. Seeing her expanded 
mouth, I assumed a dwarfish form. At that moment, I still became reduced to the size of a human thumb."

"After entering her mouth quickly, I then came out instantly. The divine Surasa, in her 
native form, spoke to me again, as follows:

"'O gently monkey! O the foremost among monkeys! Go happily for the fulfillment of your 
purpose. Bring back Seetha to the magnanimous Rama. O mighty armed monkey! Be happy. I am pleased with 
you.'"

"Then, all living beings praised me! Saying Good! Well done! Bravo! Thereupon, I leapt 
into the extensive sky, like Garuda the eagle, the carrier of Lord Vishnu."

"In the meanwhile, my shadow was held fast. Yet, I did not perceive anything. My speed 
having been blocked, I surveyed all the ten directions. But I could not discover there, any object by 
which my movement was blocked."

"Then, the thought arose in me: "How I wonder has such a hindrance arose in my journey, 
although no concrete configuration is being seen here?"

"While I was thinking thus, my sight has fallen downward. There, I saw a terrible female-demon 
lying in water."

"Heartily laughing with a great noise, that terrific woman, spoke to me the following 
inauspicious words, firmly and without any bewilderment (as follows):

"O gigantic monkey! Where are you going? You are my requisite food, hungry as I am. Gratify 
my person, who has remained without sustenance for long."

"Saying 'Amen', I actually accepted those words. Thereupon, I expanded my body to a size 
larger than the capacity of her mouth."

"Her terrific large mouth too began to grow to devour me. She could not understand well 
about me or about the change subsequently gone through by me (in the shape of a minute form)"

"Then, having contracted my large body within another moment, I extracted her heart and 
leapt back into the sky."

"When her heart has been cut off by me, that terrific Simhika looking like a mountain, 
fell into the ocean with her arms emanating from it."

"I heard great sages along with wandering celestial singers, moving in the sky, saying 
that Simhika the dreadful demon was instantly killed by Hanuma."

"After killing her and again recollecting the task to be performed quickly, I travelled 
for a long distance and saw the southern shore of the ocean, where that City of Lanka, adorned with 
its trees, was situated."

"While the sun was setting, I, without being noticed by the demons of dreadful prowess, 
entered the city of Lanka, the abode of demons."

"While I was entering the City, a woman, resembling a cloud at the time of dissolution 
of the world, stood up in front of me, emitting a loud laughter."

"Then defeating that woman, having her hair looking terrific like a blazing fire and 
who was trying to kill me, by striking her with a blow of the fist of my left hand and entered the land 
of Lanka at the dusk of early night. she, being frightened, spoke to me as follows:

"O hero! I am (the personified) City of Lanka. Therefore, by the same prowess you conquered 
me, you can defeat all the demons here completely."

"Searching there for Seetha that whole night in Ravana's gynaecium, I could not find 
that Seetha, the slender-waisted lady."

"Unable to find Seetha in Ravana's dwelling and facing a sea of sorrow, I could not then 
perceive its other shore."

"While bemoaning, I saw an excellent grove near that gynaecium, concealed by a prolonged 
fence painted with golden colour."

Crossing the fence, I saw that grove having copious trees. Amidst that Ashoka garden, 
I saw a large Shimshupa* garden. After ascending it, I beheld an yellow-pigmented thicket of banana 
plants."

"Not far from that Shimshupa tree. I saw Seetha, of youthful complexion, with eyes looking 
like lotus-petals, with her face emaciated by fasting, clad in a single piece of cloth, her hair soiled 
with dust, her limbs afflicted with grief and agony, devoted as she was to the good of her lord and 
surrounded on all sides by ugly and cruel female-demons living on flesh and blood, as a doe encircled 
by tigresses."

"Seetha, who had eyes like those of a deer, was somehow quickly found by me looking depressed 
in the amidst of female-demons, frightened (as she was by them) again and again, putting on a single 
braid of hair (as a mark of desolation), wholly devoted to the thought of her lord, having floor as 
her bedstead, pale-limbed like a lotus-stalk in a cool season, turning away the request of Ravana, and 
determined to die."

"Seeing that illustrious woman, the consort of Rama in such a state, I stayed perched 
on the same Simsupa tree, looking at her."

"Meanwhile, I heard an exceedingly roaring and hallooing sound, mixed with sounds of 
girdles and anklets in the abode of Ravana."

"Then, I was very much frightened and contracted my physique. I, on my part, remained 
hidden like a bird in that Simsupa tree dense with foliage.'"

"Then, the mighty Ravana and his wives reached that place where Seetha was staying."

"Thereupon, seeing that Ravana the chief of a troop of demons, Seetha with her lovely 
waist, sat compressing her thighs enclosing her swollen breasts with her arms."

"Ravana, bowing his head and coming down, spoke (as follows) to that Seetha who was frightened, 
very much grieving for her lord, glancing hither and thither, not finding any protection for her, trembling, 
distressed and extremely sorrowful saying, 'Treat me with respect.'"

" 'O arrogant lady! O Seetha! If you refuse me by your arrogance, I will be drinking 
your blood after a period of two months.'"

"Hearing those words of the evil-minded Ravana, Seetha was very much irritated and spoke 
the following excellent words:

"How did your tongue not fall of, O the worst demon, by speaking such words not to be 
uttered, to the consort of Rama, of boundless glory, and the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha the lord of 
Ikshvaku dynasty?"

"O ignoble soul! Of what account is your prowess, when you came unnoticed during the 
absence of my lord, that great soul and abducted me, O sinful one?"

" 'You have no similarity with Rama. You are unfit even to do service to Rama. Rama performs 
sacrifices. He speaks only truth. He is a lover of battle'."

"Hearing these harsh words from Seetha, Ravana was at once ablaze with anger, as a fire 
blazes in a pile of wood."

" 'Rolling his cruel eyes and lifting his right fist, Ravana was about to kill Seetha. 
Then, an alarm was raised by a women there'."

"Springing up from the midst of those women, a royal woman named Mandodari, the wife 
of that evil-minded Ravana, ran to him. He was restrained by her."

"She spoke to Ravana, smitten with love, the following sweet words: 'O Ravana having 
a prowess similar to that of Indra! Of what need is with Seetha to you?"

" 'O lord! Enjoy yourself with the daughters of gods, Gandharvas the celestial musicians 
and Yakshas the semi-divine beings. What will you do with Seetha?'"

"Thereupon, those women together propitiated that mighty Ravana and quickly took him 
to his palace."

"When that Ravana left, the ugly-faced female-demons frightened. Seetha with their cruel 
and very dreadful words."

"Seetha reckoned the utterance of those women as a blade of grass. At that time, the 
roaring of those female-demons reached Seetha in vain."

"As their roaring frittered away, those flesh-eating female-demons became helpless and 
reported that great resolve of Seetha to Ravana."

"Thereafter, all those women joined together, warded off their hopes and held back their 
effort. In the end, they encircled Seetha and were overpowered with sleep."

"When those women went to sleep, Seetha, intent upon the welfare of her husband, was 
deeply aggrieved, miserable and sore depressed as she was, lamenting pitifully."

"Trijata, rising from the midst of those female-demons, spoke the following words; 'Feed 
on yourself quickly rather than on Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, a virtuous woman and the daughter-in-law 
of Dasartha who des not get destroyed'."

"'Now, I have seen a dreadful dream, causing my hair to stand erect. It is pointing towards 
the ruin of our demons and the victory of her husband."

" We will pray Seetha, who is capable of protecting all our female-demons from Rama. 
I feel that it is batter for us'."

" 'When such a dream is seen while a woman is weeping, that woman gets relieved of many 
kinds of sorrows and will obtain happiness. Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, indeed will be pleased on 
receiving a salutation'."

"Delighted at hearing the victory of her lord, that girl Seetha then basfully spoke: 
'If it is true, I will be protecting you all'."

"Taking rest for some time and seeing such a dreadful state of Seetha, I reflected upon 
it. My mind could not satisfy itself."

"Thinking about a means for starting a conversation with Seetha, I started to describe 
the history of Ikshvaku's dynasty."

"Hearing the words spoken by me, which are adored by the assemblies of royal sages, Seetha 
the princess, with her eyes filled with tears, spoke to me, as follows:"

" 'O the foremost among the monkeys! Who are you? Why did you come here? How did you 
come? What type of friendship do you have with Rama? You ought to tell me all this?"

"Hearing those words of Seetha, I spoke the following words: 'O princess! There is a 
courageous king of monkeys, by name Sugreeva, who is a mighty companion to your husband, possessing 
a terrific prowess."

"Know me, who came here, as Hanuma, a servant of that Sugreeva, Rama, you husband, who 
is unwearied in his actions, sent me here for your sake."

"O illustrious lady! Rama, the foremost among men and the glorious man, gave this finger-ring 
personally to you as a token of remembrance."

"O princess! For that reason, I wish to have a command from you. What am I to do? I shall 
take you to the proximity of Rama and Lakshmana. What do you say?"

"Hearing my words and understanding them, Seetha the daughter of Janaka said as follows: 
'Let Rama take me back, after killing Ravana'."

"Bowing my head in salutation to the noble and irreproachable Seetha, I asked for a token 
of remembrance which would gladden the heart of Rama."

"Then, Seetha spoke to me as follows: 'Let this foremost jewel, be taken, by which the 
long-armed Rama will be having a high opinion of you'."

"Speaking thus, Seetha having fine hips, gave that wonderful and the foremost jewel. 
Highly distressed, she gave a message also in words to me."

"Then, offering salutation to Seetha the princess in utmost devotion, I circumambulated 
her from left to right, of course with my mind setting out to come here."

"Determining something in mind, she spoke to me again as follows: 'O Hanuma! You ought 
to tell Rama about my tale of woes occurring here'."

" 'Act so that both those heroes Rama and Lakshmana together with Sugreeva quickly arrive 
here, soon after hearing my tale'."

"'If proves to be otherwise, my survival will be only for two months. Rama cannot see 
me thereafter. As such, I will be dying like a helpless woman'."

"Hearing those miserable words, I became angry. Thereafter, I thought of my remaining 
successive action to be done."

"Thereafter, my body grew up to a size equal to that of a mountain. Then, I started destroying 
that garden, thereby longing for a combat."

"The female-demons; with their ugly faces woke up and saw that thicket of garden being 
broken and with its frightened animals and birds moving about unsteadily."

"Coming from their respective places and seeing me in that garden, those female-demons 
quickly went and reported the matter to Ravana (as follows):"

"O mighty king! Indeed not knowing your prowess, an evil-minded monkey ahs demolished 
your inaccessible garden."

"O emperor! Give orders quickly for killing him, so that the evil-minded monkey, who 
caused offence to you, will get destroyed."

"Hearing those words, Ravana sent invincible demons called Kinkaras, who were adapted 
to the mind of Ravana."

"In that portion of the garden, I destroyed with an iron rod, eight thousand kinkaras, 
having darts and hammers in their hands."

"Taking quick steps, those few who have survived, went and reported the news to Ravana, 
of their large army having been killed by me."

"Then, an idea came to me. Occupying a lofty palatial mansion of a sanctuary which was 
an eminent ornament of Lanka. I killed again a hundred demons stationed there with a pillar."

"Then, Ravana dispatched Jambumali, the son of Prahasta together with numerous dreadful 
demons having terrific forms."

"I destroyed that demon, though endowed with a great strength and skilled in warfare, 
along with his followers, with my terrific iron bar itself."

"Hearing of it, Ravana, the king of demons, dispatched the son of his minister, endowed 
with great strength and strengthened with a regiment of infantry."

"I killed all of them also by that iron bar itself. Hearing of the minster's sons, who 
were quick in exhibiting their valour in battle, having been killed, Ravana dispatched five valiant 
generals."

"I got all the minster's sons together with their army destroyed. Then, Ravana, the ten-headed 
monster, sent his mighty son, Aksha together with a multitude of army for the combat."

"I suddenly caught by the feet, that prince, son of Mandodari, who was skilled in warfare 
and who was jumping into the sky with his sword and shield. I whirled him round a hundred times and 
crushed him."

"Hearing of the death of Aksha in combat, that ten-headed Ravana was very much enraged 
and thereupon dispatched his second son, by name Indrajit, who was strong but foolishly arrogant in 
battle."

"By conquering all that army in battle and making that Indrajit the foremost among demons; 
lusterless, I experienced a great joy."

"Ravana himself dispatched, with a great confidence, that long-armed and mighty Indrajit 
along with valiant demons excited with their arrogance."

"Knowing me to be irresistible and his own army being perishable, that Indrajit with 
a great haste, captured me with a Brahma-missile."

"Then, the demons, after capturing me, tied me there with ropes and carried me away to 
Ravana's presence."

"Seeing me, the evil-minded Ravana spoke to me. He asked, why did you come to Lanka? 
'Why did you kill the demons?'"

"I answered 'I have done all these acts for the sake of Seetha. O king of demons! I came 
to your abode with a desire to see Seetha. I am the offspring of wind-god and a monkey by name Hanuma'."

" 'Know me to be a monkey, an envoy of Rama and a minister of Sugreeva. As Rama's messenger, 
I sought your presence here!"

" That Sugreeva of great splendour enquired about your welfare. He told you (the following) 
beneficiary words, endowed with righteousness wealth and pleasure, appropriate for you'."

" 'While I was dwelling in Mount R^ishyamuka, abounding with numerous trees, Rama having 
a great prowess in battle became a friend to me'."

" 'The king Rama told me that his wife had been taken away by a demon and that I had 
to help him in that matter by all means'."

" 'I also told him about the killing of Vali and requested him to come to a mutual agreement 
for helping me in that matters'."

" 'Rama, the great lord along with Lakshmana made friendship with Sugreeva, (whose kingdom 
was taken away by Vali) taking Agni the fire-god for a witness.'

" 'Killing Vali by a single arrow in combat, Rama made Sugreeva (lord of monkeys) an 
emperor of monkeys'."

" 'Now we have to extend help to that Rama in all ways. Therefore, I am sending Hanuma 
rightly to your presence'."

" 'Even before the heroic monkeys destroy your army, bring Seetha quickly and give her 
back to Rama'."

" 'To whom is this strength of the monkeys not already known, who go even to the presence 
of gods, when invited by them for help?'"

" 'Sugreeva the king of monkeys has sent the foregoing message to you. 'When spoken by 
me in these words, Ravana was enraged and looked on me, as though he was going to reduce me to ashes 
with his very looks."

"Without knowing my glory ( in the form of my immunity to death), the evil-minded Ravana, 
the demon doing terrific acts, ordered for my killing."

"Then, there is the brother of that Ravana, called Vibhishana having a great intelligence. 
He entreated Ravana, the king of demons, on my behalf (as follows)"

"O Ravana the foremost among the demons! No such attempt should be made in this way. 
Let this design be abandoned forthwith. Your are indeed following a path which is contrary to the statesmanship."

"O Ravana! It is not indeed found in states' policies of killing an envoy. The real truth 
is to be known from an envoy speaking a good counsel."

"O Ravana of great prowess! Even if a very high offence is committed by an envoy, an 
act of disfiguring the person is mentioned in a treatise of state-policy and not of killing."

"Hearing the words of Vibhishana, Ravana ordered those demons to burn my tail by fire."

"Thereupon, hearing Ravana's words; the demons wrapped up my entire tail with bark of 
hemp and torn cotton-clothes."

"Thereafter, the demons of terrible prowess, who completed their arrangements, striking 
me with their wooden staffs and fists, burnt my tail. Eventhough I was bound with many ropes, I maintained 
restraint."

"Then, having reached the city-gate, those strong demons made a loud proclamation of 
my presence in the principal streets, bound and enveloped in flames as I was."

"Then, after contracting my gigantic form once more and releasing my bondage, I stood 
in my native form again. Seizing an iron bar, I killed those demons."

"Then, I quickly jumped on to that city-gate and without any bewilderment, I set fire 
that city with its attics, ramparts and gates with my tail inflamed, even as a fire at the end of the 
world, burns all living creatures."

"The entire Lanka has been reduced to ashes. No place is seen unburnt in this City. Therefore 
Seetha also must have been surely burnt."

"Thus filled with grief, I came about to reflect as above. Meanwhile, I heard the auspiciously 
worded utterance of charanas the celestial signers who were narrating a tale of astonishment saying 
that Seetha has not been burnt."

"After hearing those surprising words, a thought arose in me that Seetha escaped being 
burnt. This indicated by the following good omens:

"In the first place, even though me tail is burning, the fire is not burning my body. 
My heart too is delighted. The winds are sweet-smelling."

"My heart was delighted by seeing those good omens having their fruits apparent, by looking 
into the their fruits apparent, by looking into the reasons of high characteristics and by hearing the 
words of accomplished sages."

"Seeing Seetha once more, relieved by her again and then reaching the Mount Arishta there 
again, I started leaping back (over the sea) with a longing to see you (all)."

"Then, treading upon the path of the sky, frequented by the wind, the moon, the sun, 
Siddhas the semi-divine beings and Gandharvas the celestial musicians, I saw you all here."

"I performed all tasks for accomplishing the purpose of Sugreeva, by the grace of Rama 
and also through your energy."

"I have done all this properly there. Do accomplish that which remains undone in this 
task by me and complete it."

undefined

undefined

undefined


After that, Hanuma, the destroyer of foes, desired to travel in the sky where
celestials like chaaranas tread, to search for Seetha, who was taken away by Ravana.


Hanuma who desired to perform a deed done by no one else, shone like a bull without
any obstacles, with his stretched neck and raised head.


After that, the mighty and courageous Hanuma roamed at ease on the lawns with the
hue of an emerald, which looked like still water from a distance.


The thoughtful Hanuma tread like a rampant lion, making birds fear, uprooting trees
by his breast and also killing many animals.


That great monkey Hanuma shone like an elephant in a lake, standing on the foot of
that great mountain by the name of Mahendra, where many elephants of good breed resided, which was
beautifully decorated with many naturally formed mineral rocks of varied hue like black, white,
red, blue, yellow and green and which was surrounded by godly serpents and Yakshas, Kinnaras,
Gandharvas who were capable of assuming desired form, together with their families.


He saluted with joined palms to the Sun-God, Lord Indra, God of Wind, Lord Brahma
and Bhutas and decided to leave.


Hanuma turned towards east, saluted his father, the Lord of Wind and increased his
body to go towards southern direction.


With all the Vaanaras seeing, Hanuma decided to fly and like an ocean swelling on
full moon days, grew for Rama's success.


With a desire to cross the ocean, Hanuma grew his body immeasurably and pressed the
mountain with his feet and hands.


Thus tormented by Hanuma, that mountain shook for an instant and showered all
flowers of trees on it.


Covered all through by those fragrant flowers which fell down from the trees, that
mountain shone like a mountain made of flowers.


That mountain shed water like an elephant in rut emitting rut juice, after being
pressed by the mighty Hanuma.


Pressed by that mighty Hanuma, streaks of gold silver and antimony color appeared on
the Mahendra mountain.


Huge Rocks of Sulfur were also shot forth from that mountain, just as a fire burning
with a medium flame would emit columns of smoke.


Being pressed on all sides by the mountain which itself was being pressed by Hanuma,
creatures living in the caves of that mountain shrieked in horrifying tones.


That loud noise from creatures which emanated because of stress caused to the
mountain, filled the earth and all four directions and forests near that mountain.


Great snakes with clear swastika signs on their hoods, spewed out frightening flames
with their great heads and bit the rocks with their teeth.


Then those great rocks bit by those snakes with anger and venom, burned due to the
flame and split into thousand pieces.


Medicinal herbs from that mountain, although capable of destroying ordinary poisons,
could not neutralize the poison from those snakes.


Ascetics residing on that mountain flew away from there thinking that some demons
were destroying it. Vidhyadharas who lived there, became afraid and flew away with their women
folk, leaving behind them golden jugs of wine in the liquor house, gold vases, a varieties of
sauces that can be licked, eatables, various meats, skins of oxen and swords with golden hilts.


The intoxicated Vidyadharas with garlands around their neck decked with red flower
garlands and smeared with sandal paste, with reddened eyes, and with lotus shaped eyes, obtained
the sky.


Vidyadhara women wearing necklaces, anklets, armlets and bangles stood in the sky
with surprise and with smiles along with their loved ones.


Vidyadharas and great sages stood in the sky in a group, showing their great prowess
and viewed the mountain.


Then they heard words of Charanas, Siddhas and pure hearted Rishis who were located
in that clear sky.


"This Hanuma, who is equal to a mountain, who is the son of Vayu, and who has great
speed, wants to cross the ocean which is abode to crocodiles."


"Hanuma has decided to perform an impossible task for the sake of Rama and Vanaras
and wants to obtain the other side of ocean which is hard to obtain."


Vidyadharas thus listened to the words of those great people and looked at the
incomparable Hanuma, best among Vanaras, standing on the mountain.


He, who is equal to a mountain, shook his hair, quivered his body and let out a
great roar like from a vast cloud.


About to fly, Hanuma jolted his tail, which was rolled into a circle from top to
bottom, and which was covered with hair, just as Garuda, the king of birds would jolt a snake.


Receiving his vigor, the tail curled at his back was seen like a great serpent being
stolen by Garuda.


Hanuma firmly supported his arms (on the mountain surface) which resembled huge iron
clubs, crouched the waist and contracted his feet.


Bending shoulders and neck, that mighty and glorious Hanuma, increased his energy,
strength and courage.


With his eyes raised up, seeing the way from a distance, viewing the sky, he held
his breath in his heart.


That mighty Hanuma, equal to an elephant among monkeys and the best among Vaanaraas,
stood firmly with his legs, bent his ears and before flying spoke these words to the Vaanaraas.


"I will go to the city of Lanka, ruled by Ravana just like an arrow released by Rama
will go, with wind-like speed. If I do not see the daughter of Janaka there, I will go with the
same speed to the abode of gods. If I do not see Seetha there in heaven, I will get Ravana the king
of raakshasaas tied up in chains without any effort. I will, in all events, return successfully
along with Seetha or I will get Lanka along with Ravana after uprooting it."


The best among Vaanaraas, Hanuma, spoke in this way to Vaanaraas and then without
thinking about anything else, flew up with lot of vigor. That great monkey also thought himself
equal to Garuda, the king of birds.


While he was flying up, due to that force, all trees on that mountain flew away in
all directions, drawing together all their branches.


While flying in the sky, he took along with him, because of the force of his thighs,
trees shining with flowers and with fattened lapwing birds.


The trees thus being held aloft by the speed of Hanuma's thighs, followed him for a
while just as relatives would follow their loved ones embarking on a long journey.


Uprooted by the force of Hanuma's thighs, Sal and other excellent trees followed
Hanuma like soldiers following their king.


Hanuma the great monkey presented a wonderful sight, with his mountain-like
appearance together with the well flowered trees.


After that, powerful trees sank into the salt ocean like mountains sinking into
ocean due to fear of Mahendra.


That Hanuma who was equal to a cloud, covered with flowers of various kinds, shoots
and buds, shone like a mountain with fireflies.


Those trees which were released by Hanuma's speed, dropped flowers and fell down in
the water like friends going back after bidding farewell to their dear one.


Set in motion by the wind from the movement of Hanuma, that variety of blossom, with
various hues, from the trees fell down into the sea. That great ocean shone like the sky filled
with stars.


Hanuma shone like a cloud in the sky decorated by lightening, with flowers of
various hues sticking to his body.


That sea water looked like the sky with delightful stars rising up, with flowers
flown up by Hanuma's speed.


That sky-borne Hanuma's arms which were spread out, were seen like five-headed
serpents coming out of a mountain's peak.


That great monkey shone like one who is drinking the great sea together with its
waves. He also seemed like one who desires to drink the whole of sky.


The eyes of that Hanuma, who was following the path of sky, which had a brilliance
equal to that of lightening, were shining like two fires on a mountain.


The round, wide, reddish brown eyes of Hanuma, the best among the monkeys shone like
fully risen sun and moon.


The ruddy face of Hanuma, with His reddish face shone like the Sun touched by
twilight.


The tail of Hanuma, the son of Vayu floating in the sky, being risen up looked like
the pillar erected in honour of Indra.


The great intellectual Hanuma, with his great body, and with white teeth, shone like
the Sun, being surrounded by his circular tail.


That great monkey Hanuma, with his red colored buttocks, shone like a mountain with
a large deposit of red Gairika herb broken into pieces.


Air passing through the lion among monkeys Hanuma's arm pits sounded like a
thundering cloud.


The best among monkeys Hanuma flying thus in the sky, looked like a meteor darting
away with great speed in the sky from northern direction.


With a fast pace equaling that of Sun god, the tall Hanuma shone like an elephant
which increases its size when being festered by a rope.


Then Hanuma who was flying above the ocean with his body above the ocean and his
shadow being immersed in the sea below, looked like a boat being driven by wind.


Whatever place Hanuma went towards on the ocean, that place became agitated due to
the force of thighs.


That great monkey with great speed flew in the sky striking with his chest series of
waves which had a great body like that of mountains.


Wind from the mighty Hanuma and the wind released from the clouds caused the ocean
with a fearful sound to shake a lot.


Hanuma flew in the sky dragging along with him big waves from the ocean as though he
were sprinkling them in the sky.


Hanuma with great speed crossed waves which were equal to Mount Meru and Mount
Mandara, that had risen up in the sea, as if counting them.


Then the water together with clouds which was driven up by the force of Hanuma,
shone like a stretched autumnal cloud in the sky.


Then various whales, fishes, turtles and crocodiles were being seen clearly in the
sea just as bodies of humans would be seen when clothes are removed.


Serpents living in the sea saw Hanuma flying in the sky and thought that it was
Garuda, the king of birds.


Hanuma's shadow which was ten yojanas wide and thirty yojanas long appeared very
beautiful on water.


That shadow which was following Hanuma and spread on the ocean, shone like a series
of dense white clouds.


That great monkey Hanuma, the great resplendent one with a huge body, shone like a
mountain with wings flying in the sky without any support underneath.


In whatever path Hanuma the mighty one went, in that path, there immediately
appeared a trough in the ocean below.


Hanuma while coursing through the path of birds like the king of birds Garuda,
dragged with him series of clouds like the god of wind.


Great clouds with white, red, blue and madder colors shone on being dragged by
Hanuma.


Hanuma who is repeatedly entering and leaving series of clouds as He flies in the
sky, is being seen like the moon who shines and is hidden alternately.


Then, on seeing Hanuma flying quickly in the sky, Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas
showered flowers on him.


Then, the Sun did not scorch Hanuma, the best among Vanaras, who was flying for
Rama's welfare. The wind god Vayu also served him with a delightful breeze.


Sages praised the great resplendent Hanuma flying in the sky. Devas and Gandharvas
also sang in His praise.


Immediately on seeing the best among monkeys, Hanuma, flying without any effort,
Nagas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Devas and birds all praised Him.


While that best among vanaras, Hanuma, was flying, the god of ocean thought thus for
the respect of Ikshvaaku dynasty:


"If I do not help this best among vanaras Hanuma, I shall become prone to all kinds
of ill-talk by those who want to speak against me."


"I was developed by Sagara of Ikshvaaku dynasty. This Hanuma who is helping a
descendant of that dynasty should not become tired."


"I have to behave in such a way that Hanuma would take rest. After resting in me for
a while, He can cross the remaining distance with comfort."


Samudra thus making a good thought, spoke to Mainaka, the best among mountains with
gold in the middle hidden in water.


"O best among mountains Mainaka! You have been positioned here by Devendra as an
obstacle to the groups of asuras living in paataala."


"You are standing at the entrance of paataala which is difficult to measure, fully
covering it, when asuras courageous by birth are trying to rise up again."


"O mountain, you have capability to grow wide, up or down. O best among mountains,
for that reason I am encouraging you. Raise up."


"Hanuma, the best among monkeys, the courageous one, who has taken up a fearful task
for the benefit of Rama, that such Hanuma while flying in the sky is coming over you."


"To this Hanuma, who is a follower of the Ikshvaaku dynasty, help should be done by
me now. Descendants of Ikshvaaku are repectable to me. They are even more respectable to you."


"Do help to us. Our task may not be miscarried. A task which needs to be performed
and not done, will increase the anger of good people."


"Raise up above from the water. This Hanuma is the best among fliers and is a guest
to be worshipped for us. Let him stand on you."


"O mountain with golden hued middle area and one who is served by Devas and
Gandharvas! Hanuma can take rest on you and then traverse rest of the distance."


"You are fit to raise up after seeing the gentleness of Sri Rama, and the exile of
Seetha, and the effort of Hanuma."


The mountain with gold in the middle, Mainaka, listening to the words of the salty
ocean, got up quickly from the water, together with great trees and creepers.


Then that Mainaka became in the risen state, passing through the ocean water, just
like the Sun piercing through a cloud with His shining rays.


That great Mainaka who was covered by water in all directions, who had peaks with
Kinnaras and great serpents, which were equal to a sun rise, which were touching the sky, and which
had a golden hue, being ordered by the ocean, showed his peaks in an instant.


The sky which had a bluish tinge like that of a sword, shone with a golden hue
because of the peaks of the mountain which rose up and which was like molten gold.


That best among mountains became equal to a hundred suns with its peaks which had a
golden hue and which were shining with a self generated shine.


Hanuma on seeing the mountain which stood before Him, rising up from the middle of
the salty ocean suddenly, decided that it as an obstacle.


That great monkey Hanuma with a great speed, brought that great tall mountain with
His chest just as the God of wind would a cloud.


That best among mountains Mainaka, thus being fell down by that Hanuma, recognized
Hanuma's speed and lauded him with pleasure.


Mount Mainaka with love and with gladdened heart obtained a human form and standing
on its own peak, spoke these words approaching that courageous Hanuma in the sky.


"O the great Vanara! You have performed this impossible task of flying over the
ocean. Do come down on to my peaks and rest for a while to your comfort."


"The ocean was developed by people born in Sri Rama's dynasty. That such ocean is
worshipping in lieu of Sri Rama, you who is desirous of Sri Rama's welfare."


"When a service is done, a return service needs to be rendered. This is an ancient
tradition. Such this ocean who wants to do a return service to the Raghu dynasty, is suitable for
respect by you."


""After flying a hundred yojanas, let this Hanuma rest on your peak and then travel
the rest of distance." - Thus I have been encouraged by this ocean for your sake due to His great
respect for you. O best among vanaras! Stop for a while and then go after resting on me."


"O best among vanaras! For that reason, here is lots of roots, fruits and other
eatables which are fragrant and sweet. May you leave after eating that and resting here for a
while."


"O chief among vanaras! Besides this, there also exists a relationship which is
famous in all the three worlds, which is based on great virtues, for us with you."


"O son of Vayu, the god of wind! O best among vanaras! I am thinking you as being
very important among those vanaras who are fast and who are capable of flying."


"By a person who wants to know dharma or by one who knows dharma, a guest even
though ordinary is to be respected. What else can I say in the case of a great guest like you."


"O best among vanaras! You are the son of the great Vayu - the God of wind, who is
best in speed among the Devas. In speed you are equal to him alone."


"O knower of Dharma! If you are worshipped, Vayu also gets worship. For that reason
you are to be worshipped by me. Also listen to another reason in this matter."


"O son! Earlier in the Krita yuga, mountains had wings. With speed equal to that of
Garuda and Vayu, they went in all directions."


"After that when those mountains were thus flying freely, Devas and living creatures
together with sages obtained fear in the doubt that those mountains might fall down."


"Then the angry Devendra who performed a hundred Asvamedha rituals, cut off the
wings of thousands of mountains by his weapon vajra then and there."


"That Devendra angrily reached me with raised vajra. Then I was thrown away
immediately by the great Vayu."


"O best among vanaras! With saved full wings, being thrown down into this salt
ocean, I have been protected by your father."


"O chief among vanaras! Vayu is thus indeed respectable to me. For that reason I am
respecting you. My this relationship with you has great virtues."


"O great Vanara! Because this matter is like this, you are suitable to make myself
and Sagara happy, with a gladdened heart."


"O best among Vanaras! Reduce your fatigue. Accept our worship also. Respect our
love. I am happy by your manifestation."


Hanuma listening to the best mountain's words, spoke thus : "I am happy. Hospitality
has been done. Let this ill feeling be removed."


"The time to perform my duty is hastening me. The day too is passing. A promise has
also been given by me. I should not stand here in the middle neglecting my duty."


The courageous Hanuma saying thus, touched the mountain with His hand, entered the
sky and flew on with a smile.


That Hanuma was thus seen with great respect by the ocean and the mountain, and also
worshipped with suitable blessings.


After that leaving the mountain and the great ocean, and flying up far into the
clear sky, Hanuma followed the path of his father.


The son of Vayu obtained the speed to fly still higher into the sky and seeing that
mountain below, went in the clear sky which had no support.


Seeing Hanuma perform that very difficult second task (first one being the flight
over ocean), all Devas, Siddhas and great sages praised Him.


Devas and the thousand eyed Devendra who were there, became happy by the task of
that golden hued Mainaka.


The wise Devendra himself spoke these words through faltering tones due to extreme
happiness, to Mainaka, the best among mountains.


"O Mainaka, the king of mountains! I am very happy with you. O gentle one! I am
giving protection to you. Proceed according to your comfort."


To the dauntless Hanuma crossing hundred yojanas, who is fearless even when there is
reason to be afraid, a great help has been done by you.


This Vanara Hanuma is going for the benefit of Sri Rama, the son of Dasaratha. I am
very happy with you who is doing respect to Him.


Thereafter, the best among mountains obtained great happiness on seeing Devendra,
the lord of Devas being happy.


Then that mountain with a given boon from Devendra stood still there. Hanuma also
leaped over that part of the ocean in an instant.


Thereafter, Devas together with Gandharvas, Siddhas and great sages spoke thus to
Surasa, the mother of Nagas, equal to the Sun in brilliance.


"This glorious son of Vayu, going by the name of Hanuma is flying over the ocean.
You obtain a horrible mountain like demonic appearance and make a face with fearful tusks,
red-brown eyes and as vast as the sky, and create an obstacle to Him for an instant."


"We are desiring to find out if by His strength and also courage and intelligence He
can win over you or obtain sorrow."


That Goddess Surasa, thus spoken to by Devas and also being respected by them,
wearing a horrible disfigured appearance of a demon in the middle of the ocean which caused fear to
all, and stopping Hanuma who was flying, spoke these words.


"O best among Vanaras! You have been given by Devas as my food. I will eat you.
Enter inside my mouth."


Thus spoken to by Surasa, the glorious Hanuma, with a happy face and with folded
hands, spoke these words to Surasa.


"The son of Dasaratha, with the name of Rama entered the forest of Dandaka together
with His brother Lakshmana and wife Seetha."


"When that Sri Rama, with a bitter enmity towards Rakshasas, was diverted in another
task, His famed wife Seetha had been taken away by Ravana."


"I am going for Rama's sake as a messenger to find Her presence. O subject of Sri
Rama! You are suited to help Rama."


"Otherwise after seeing Seetha and informing that to Sri Rama who makes Seetha
without troubles, I will obtain your mouth. I am promising truthfully to you."


Thus being spoken to by Hanuma, Surasa with power to take desired form, spoke thus:
"No one can overcome me. This is my boon."


Mother of Nagas, Surasa, desiring to know the strength of Hanuma, spoke these words
on seeing Him going away.


"O best among Vanaras! You are bound to go only after entering my mouth. This boon
had been given to me long ago by Brahma." - speaking thus, with quickness she opened her wide mouth
and stood before Hanuma.


Then Hanuma speaking thus to Surasa, became angry and became ten yojanas long and
ten yojanas wide.


Seeing Hanuma, who looked like a cloud, being ten yojanas long, Surasa also made her
mouth twenty yojanas long.


Thereafter, Hanuma got angry and became thirty yojanas long. Surasa made her mouth
forty yojanas high. The courageous Hanuma then became fifty yojanas high.


Thereafter, Hanuma got angry and became thirty yojanas long. Surasa made her mouth
forty yojanas high. The courageous Hanuma then became fifty yojanas high.


Surasa then made her mouth sixty yojanas long. The mighty Hanuma in the same
fashion, became seventy yojanas high.


Surasa made her mouth eighty yojanas high. The mountain-like Hanuma then became
ninety yojanas high.


The great wise Hanuma seeing that mouth with a long tongue which was horrible and
equal to hell being opened by Surasa, greatly reduced His own body and became the size of a
thumb.


The glorious Hanuma with great speed, quickly entered Surasa's mouth and came out of
it and standing in the sky spoke these words to Surasa.


"O daughter of Daksha! I indeed entered your mouth. My regards to you. I will now go
where Seetha is. Your boon also came true."


Seeing that Vanara being released from her mouth like the moon from the mouth of
Rahu, goddess Surasa spoke these words assuming her normal form.


"O gentle Hanuma! Go according to your comfort to achieve the desired task. Bring
Seetha together with the great Sri Rama."


Seeing that third very difficult task of Hanuma, all the creatures then praised
Hanuma saying "Good! Good!".


That Hanuma, equal to Garuda in speed, neared the ocean which is the abode of
Varuna, entered the sky and went in His original path.


Hanuma went, like Garuda, in the sky served by clouds (or streams of water), served
also by birds, tread by masters of music Tumbura and other Gandharvas, served by Airavata, borne by
lions, elephants, tigers, birds and serpents, decorated by clear Vimanas moving with great speed,
shone by fires with thunderous jolt equal to that of Vajra - the weapon of Devendra, decorated by
people with good deeds, people with great luck who conquered the heavens, served by the God of fire
carrying great quantities of oblations, shone by planets, stars, moon, sun and starlets, occupied
by groups of great sages, Gandharvas, Nagas, Yakshas but unpopulated by humans, clear and all
pervasive, served by the gandharva king Vishvaavasu, roamed by elephants of Devendra, the path of
the moon and the sun, the auspicious one, a wide canopy of the earth constructed by Brahma, served
in various ways by excellent courageous groups of Vidyadharas.


Hanuma, the son of Vayu, visible everywhere, obtained the sky without support, like
the king of birds with long wings.


A demoness by the name of Simhika with the power to assume desired form, saw Hanuma
flying, increased in size and thought thus in her mind.


"After a long time, this great animal came into my grasp. After long time, today I
will enjoy my meal."


Thinking thus in her mind, Simhika attracted His shadow. While the shadow was thus
being grasped, Hanuma thought thus.


"Like a great boat in the ocean with opposing winds, I am being pulled back
forcefully, with disabled power."


After that, Hanuma looking sideways, upwards and downwards, saw a big animal raised
up in the salty ocean.


Hanuma saw that animal with a horrible face and thought: "This animal with a strange
appearance, with great strength attracting shadow, is indeed the animal that had been told by
Sugriva. There is no doubt in that."


That wise Hanuma recognizing that animal correctly as Simhika, increased His body
greatly, like a cloud in rainy season.


That Simhika seeing the growing body of the great monkey Hanuma, spread her mouth to
be equal to the middle of Patala.


Roaring like a dense cloud, she ran towards the Vanara. Then the wise Hanuma saw her
opened very big mouth equal to His own body and also her internal organs.


That Hanuma with great strength and with a body equal to a diamond, repeatedly
contracted His body and fell into her opened mouth.


Siddhas and Charanas saw Hanuma sinking in her mouth, like the full moon on a full
moon day being swallowed by Rahu.


Then Hanuma rend her internal organs with His sharp nails and after that flew up
with a speed equal to that of thought.


That wise Hanuma felling Simhika down with His vision, courage and ability,
developed again by speed.


That Simhika with heart rend by Hanuma fell in water with sorrow. Seeing Simhika
killed by Hanuma, creatures roaming in the sky spoke thus to that best among Vanaras.


"O best among Vanaras! A huge animal has been killed by you. A great task has been
done. Perform the task dear to you auspiciously."


"O best among Vanaras! Whoever has the four qualities of courage, vision, intellect
and skill, all these four virtues like you, such a person will not fail in any task."


That Hanuma the respectable one, thus respected by them, entered the sky and went
like the Garuda with a determined goal.


Hanuma after almost reaching the other shore, looked in all directions and saw a
series of trees at the end of his journey of hundred yojanas.


The best among Vanaras, Hanuma, immediately after getting down also saw an island
decorated by a variety of trees and also the forests in the region of Malaya.


That Hanuma with controlled senses and with good thoughts looked at the ocean, the
bay and the trees born in the bay, and also the faces of the wives of the ocean (rivers are
considered wives of ocean), observed Himself to be equal in size to a great cloud as though
stopping the sky, and thought thus.


"After seeing my huge body and the speed, Rakshasas will become curious." - thus
thought the great Hanuma.


For that reason, Hanuma reduced His mountain-like body and obtained the nature of
one who reached self-realization, free from infatuations.


Hanuma greatly reducing His size became normal in nature regaining His original
form, like Vishnu who mitigated the strength of Bali by taking three strides.


Hanuma capable of assuming many different beautiful forms, who cannot be defeated by
enemies, obtained the other side of ocean and being cognizant of Himself restored His own form and
became with a decided mission.


After that great one who looked like a huge mass of clouds, alighted on the mountain
peak of Lamba with wonderful lower peaks, abundant with various things and filled with Ketaka,
Uddalaka and coconut trees.


After that Hanuma for His part obtained the ocean shore, observed the city of Lanka
from the top of the mountain, leaving His original form, tormenting animals and birds, alighted on
that mountain.


Having tranersed, by the dint of his strength over the ocean which was infested with
demons and reptiles and endowed with series of huge waves, and alighting on the shore of the great
sea, Hanuma then saw the City of Lanka having a resemblance of Amaravati, the capital City of
Indra.

undefined

undefined

undefined

