
On seeing Seetha wearing bark of trees like a helpless woman, eventhough protected
by her husband all the people there loudly cried out: "Fie upon you, Dasaratha!"


Pained by that loud cry there, King Dasaratha lost interest in his life, religious
merit and esteem.


Dasaratha with a warm sigh, spoke to his wife these words. "Oh, Kaikeyi! Seetha does
not deserve to go with a robe made of Kusa grass."


"My preceptro truly says that Seetha, who is delicate young and ever habituated to
comforts, is not fit for forest-life"


"has this pitiable daughter of Janaka, the jewel of kings, done any harm to any one
that, having obtained a bark of tree she is standing like a hermitess dumbfounded in the midst of
men?"


"Seetha the daughter of Janaka need not wear these barks of trees. No such pledge
was given be me earlier. hence, let this prinecess go to the forest happily fully provided ewith
all valuable possesssions."


"A Cruel pledge has been made on oath by me, who do not deserve to survive. This
(providing robes of hermitess to Seetha) has been initiated by you by sheer childishness. That will
consume me, as by its own flower to a bamboo."


"Oh evil woman! (Even) supposing a little offence is done by Rama to you, what harm
was displayed to you here by Seetha? Oh, mean woman!"


"What harm on earth can be done to you by Seetha, who has blooming eyes like those
of a female deer, soft in disposition a practiser of penance?"


"Oh, the evil woman! Sending Rama to exile thus indeed is enough for you. What use
is there for you in further doing these wretched, sinful acts too.


"Hearing the speech you gave to Rama who came here for coronation, only that much
was acceded by me, Oh queen!"


"Transgressing all that, you somehow or other wish to go to hell, by perceiving
Seetha also clad in bark of trees.


That high-souled king thus lamenting, did not see any ending to that sorrow.
Drenched as he was in excessive devotion to his son and having been hurt vey much, he fell down on
the ground.


Rama, who was setting out to the forest, spoke these words to his father, who was
speaking thus bowing down his head, sitting there.


"Oh, virtuous king! This glorious Kausalya, my mother is aged. She is not of base
nature and will not accuse you.


"Oh, the bestower of boons! You are worthy of amply respection her, who is deprived
of me, who is immersed in an ocean of sorrow and who has not see such an affliction earlier."


"Having been honoured by you the venerable man, she the pitiable woman will not get
such a grief for her son, thinking of me alone and she will draw breath in you."


"Oh, the king akim to the mighty Indra the ruler of gods! You must see that my
mother, who has high affection towards her son, will not depart to the house of Yama the God of
Death, by abandoning her life being emaciated by grief after my departure for the forest."


Thus completes 38th chapter of ayodhya Kanda in glorious Valmiki Ramayana, the work
of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Then, Dasaratha the scion of Ikshvaku dynasty, squeezed by his own promise in the
matter of sending Rama to exile, sighed heavily with tears and spoke the following words again and
agian to Sumantra.


"Oh, Sumantra! Let a military body consisting of (all) the four limbs of the arms,
filled with the best of its kind, be arranged immediately"


"Let courtesans well versed in speaking and merchants with great riches having
exposure for extension of sales bestow elegance to the forces of the Prince"


Appoint in this contingent those too, by giving abundant money to them who were
dependent on Rama and on whom he took delight in gallantry"


"Let important weapons, chiefs of police and vehicles, hunters knowing the secrets
of forest accompany Rama(scion of Kakutsa)"


"Killing deer and elephants, drinking forest-honey, seeing various rivers, he would
not remember of sovereignty"


"Let the granary and the treasury belonging to me be sent to Rama residing in the
uninhabited forest."


"Rama can spend his exile happily, by performing sacrificial rite in holy places and
disbursing appropriate gifts, along with sages living in the forest "


"The mighty armed Bharata will rule Ayodhya. Let the glorious Rama be sent alog with
all objects of enjoyment"


While Dasartha was speaking thus, fear drew near Kaikeyi. Her mouth too also got
parched. her voice also got choked.


Feeling depressed and apprehensive, with her mouth getthing parched and her face
turned towards the king, Kaikeyi spoke as follows:


"Bharata will not accept the kingdom, which will become uninhabited, hollow and
which will be absolutely unenjoyable like wine, quaffed of its spiriteous part, Oh noble soul!"


While Kaikeyi who has cast off her shame was thus uttering th emost cruel words,
King Dasaratha spoke these words to that lady with large eyes:


Having charged me with a burden, Oh hostile woman, why do you prick me while I am
carrying it? Why did you not check before(while asking the boons by putting a condition that Rama
should not be allowed to take anything with him) the deed(of sending troups etc with Rama) in the
begining itself, Oh the vulgar woman!"


Doubly enraged in hearing this angry question of Dasaratha, Kaikeyi the beautiful
woman replied to the king as follows:


Spoken to as above, king Dasaratha uttered only a word "Shame!". The entire people
there were ashamed. But Kaikeyi did not perceive it"


There, the aged and the upright chief minister siddhartha by name who was highly
esteemed by the king, spoke to Kaikeyi these words:


"Asamanja the evil-minded, catching hold of children playing in the street and
throwing them in the waters of saryu river, took delight in it"


By watching him, all the citizens were angry and spoke to the king, "choose either
to keep yourself Asamanja alone or to preserve us, Oh the promoter of the state!"


Thereupon the king said to them, "For what reason is this fear? Duly asked by the
king, those people also replied these words:


"He obtains incomparable delight by throwing, through stupidity, our playing
children in sarayu river in a whirled state of mind."


Hearing the words of those poeple, that king abandoned the son repugnant to his
subjects, in a bid to do good to them.


Arranging immediately to place him along with his wife together with the
paraphrenalia (like utensils, implements etc) in a vehicle, the king instructed his persons thus:
"He should be exiled for life."


Roaming in all directions as though he has done sinful deeds, he ransacked mountain
passes, by taking a basket and a shovel.


"The highly righteous King Sagara abandoned Asamanja for perpetration sinful deeds
as above. But, what sin Rama has done, for which he was debarred in this way?"


We do not indeed perceive any fault in Rama. It is as difficult to find a taint in
him as in a new moon.


"Or if you see any fault in Rama, Oh Kaikeyi you tell about it now correctly. Then,
Rama will be exiled."


As it is contradictory to righteousness to abandon one who is guilty and who is
devoted to a good path, it would consume the splendour of even Indra (the ruler of gods)


"Oh, Kaikeyi! Hence, there is no need of impeding the royal fortune of Rama. Oh,
lady with a charming face! Even blame from the public should be taken care of by you."


Hearing the words of Siddhartha, king Dasaratha spoke to Kaikeyi in the most
tiresome tone, with a voice choked with deep anguish, as follows.


"Oh, the sinful being! Do you not agree with these words of Siddhartha? By resorting
to the path of the deplorable, you with a bad behaviour, are not alive to my interests or to your
own. Your action is deprived of a righteous path."


"I am accompanying Rama now, by abandoning my kingdom, happiness and wealth. You
enjoy the kingdom for a long time, happily together with Bharata the King."


Thus completes 36th chapter in the Ayodhya Kanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


As long as the dust raised by the wheels of Rama's chariot could be seen, so long
did the king not withdraw his gaze from it.


As long as the king was seeing his beloved son who was exceedingly virtuous, so long
did the dust in the earth appear to be rising for the purpose of seeing his son.


When the dust raised by Rama's chariot was no longer visible, the unfortunate king
afflicted by dejection, fell insensible on ground.


When Dasaratha fell down, Kausalya his wife took her place on his right side to lift
him up and Kaikeyi of charming limbs took her place on his left side.


The king endowed with wisdom virtue and discretion seeing Kaikeyi beside him, said
to her in great agitation as follows:


"Oh, wicked Kaikeyi! Do not touch my limbs. I do not wish to see you .You are no
longer my wife nor a relative."


"I am not of those who are dependent on you nor are they anything to me. I discord
you, by whom righteousness has been discorded and who are solely interested in avariciousness."


All that contract which I entered into by taking your hand and circumambulating the
sacred fire, I now renounce in this world and the next. "


"If Bharata feels cheerful for having got this kingdom which is imperishable, let
the obsequial rites performed to me after my death do not reach me"


Meanwhile Kausalya the queen overwhelmed with grief, lifted up the king who was
covered with dust and returned to her house.


The virtuous monarch, thinking deeply of his son Rama, was so desolated as one who
has slain a brahmin intentionally or as touching the fire by hand.


Turning again and again towards the track of the chariot, the countenance of the
king in grief lost its radiance like sun losing its radiance when swallowed by Rahu.


Afflicted by grief, thinking of his beloved son he lamented. Knowing that his son
reached the end of the city, he said as follows:


"The marks of hooves of excellent horses which carried away my child are seen on the
way. But he the great souled one is not being seen"


"He who slept on comfort on coverings sprinkled with the essence of sandalwood and
refreshed by fans waved over by him by the most deserving women, Rama the best of all my sons ,
will from now on , has to take refuge at the foot of a tree somewhere, lying down on its trunk or
rest on a stone."


"The unfortunate one will wake up from the hard earth stained with dust, sighing
like a bull-elephant rising from the side of a hill"


From today the inhabitants of the forest will behold that long armed lord of the
world, Rama, rising from the ground and wandering around like an orphan"


"The daughter of Janaka, who was always accustomed to comforts, will wander
exhausted in the forest through the thorny undergrowth "


"Sita who was not earlier accustomed to woodlands, from now on will live in terror,
hearing the roaring sound of wild beasts ,which was thundering ."


"Oh, Kaikeyi! Let your desire be fulfilled! Dwell in the kingdom as a widow. I do
not indeed wish to survive without Rama the tiger among men."


Thus lamenting, the king surrounded by his people, entered Ayodhya the best of
cities like entering a disastrous house by one who has taken the funeral bath.


Seeing the entire city with its road-junctions and mansions deserted, its shops and
temples closed, with its people exhausted with fatigue and plunged in affliction; its highways not
very crowded ,the king entered his palace wailing and thinking of Rama alone as the sun enters a
cloud.


Bereft of Rama Sita and Lakshmana, the palace looked like a big pool rendered
unperturbed due to emptying of snakes in it by Garuda*


The lamenting monarch spoke in trembling accents and in soft, pitiful, indistinct
and not clearly intelligible words (as follows):


"Take me quickly to the apartment of Kausalya the mother of Rama. Nowhere else my
heart will find solace "


The attendants took the king who was speaking as aforesaid, to Kausalya's house and
there he was gently laid (on a coach).


Having entered Kausalya's apartment and even though laid on a coach, his heart
became agitated.


Bereft of his two sons and his daughter -in-law also having deserted, the king saw
that house devoid of charm as a sky without a moon.


Looking at that palace and lifting up his arm, the powerful monarch cried in a loud
voice, " Oh, Rama! You have left us both, your mother and I."


"Alas! Those jewels among men who will survive the term of fourteen years, seeing
Rama come back and embrace him, will be happy indeed."


Thereupon, the night having fallen, the night resembling the hour of death to him,
Dasaratha spoke these words to Kausalya when the midnight struck :


"Oh, Kausalya! My sight has extinguished along with Rama and not returned. Even now,
I am not able to see you properly. Touch me with your hand."


Perceiving that monarch on the coach absorbed in the thought of Rama alone, Kausalya
appeared very sad and sitting beside him, began to sigh and lament with a distressed look.


Thus completes 42nd chapter in the Ayodhya Kanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Manthara, becoming indignant with Kaikeyi, threw down the ornament given to her and
with anger and distress spoke the following words:


"O, foolish one! Not knowing that you are in the midst of an ocean of trouble, what
is it that you are so delighted about, in a matter to be grieved?"


"Oh, queen! Though stricken with grief, I mentally laugh at you in that you are
rejoicing at the time when a great calamity is befalling you."


"I am lamenting over your foolish mind. Does any intelligent woman feel happy over
the prosperity of a stepson who is considered an enemy? Does it not amount to praising a befalling
death?"


"Rama has a fear about Bharata because Bharata has equal rights over the kingdom. In
thinking about this matter, I am getting anguished. Do we not get disasters from those who are
afraid of us?"


"Lakshmana, wielding a great bow, joined Rama with all his heart. Shatrughna is as
faithful to Bharata as Lakshmana to Rama".


"Oh Kaikeyi! In line with even the proximity of birth; the claim to the throne of
Bharata alone can be pressed, that of Lakshmana and Satrughna who are younger is out of
question."


"Rama is a learned man and a political statesman. His actions are timely and
appropriate. When thinking of your son's calamity to be resulted from Rama, I get shaken with
fear".


"Kausalya is very fortunate. Brahmans are going to anoint her son for the great
princely kingdom tomorrow on the day of Pushyami star".


"With folded arms, as a maid-servant, you have to serve that Kausalya who having
reached great prosperity, in the height of joy, will dispose of her adversaries (in the person of
Bharata and yourself)".


"Thus, if you become Kausalya's servant-maid along with us, your son Bharata will be
Rama's attendant."


"Rama's wives will get delighted. Your daughters-in-law will be unhappy because of
Bharata's waning position."


Hearing Manthara speak thus in many distasteful words, Kaikeyi began to extol Rama's
virtues, saying: -


"Rama knows all righteousness. Elders trained him. He has a proper gratitude. He
speaks truth. He has a clean conduct. He is the eldest son of king Dasaratha and hence eligible for
the kingdom."


"The long living Rama will protect his brothers and servants like a father. O, the
hunch backed one! Why are you so pained on hearing about Rama's coronation?"


"After Rama's rule for one hundred years, Bharata the best among men will certainly
replace Rama on his father's throne, which is that of his ancestors."


"Oh, Manthara! When we got an occasion for rejoicing as at present and when a
festive occasion is to come off in future (too in the form of Bharata's installation, no matter
even if it comes after a hundred years), why do you feel agonized like this as though burning (with
jealousy)?"


"For me, Rama is as lovable as Bharata and even more. Is he not doing more service
to me than to Kausalya?"


"If Rama has kingdom then Bharata has it as well. Rama esteems his brothers just as
his own self."


Manthara, after hearing Kaikeyi's words, felt very sad and after a long and hot
sigh, spoke to her the following words:


"On one side, you are getting immersed in an ocean of sorrow filled with misery and
danger. But due to stupidity, you are not able to perceive the truth and you fail to assess your
real position."


"O,Kaikeyi! If Rama becomes the king, his son will become the king after him in
succession. Thus, Bharata's name itself will be removed from the royal clan."


"O, Kaikeyi! All the sons of a king will not be crowned for a kingdom. If all are
installed, there will be a great lawlessness."


"Therefore, kings, O, Kaikeyi of faultless limbs, install their eldest son,
eventhough others may be full of virtues, as their successor to the throne."


"Oh, Kaikeyi the affectionate one! Your son will be completely distant from comforts
and even from the royal clan; like an orphan."


"I came here in your interests. But you have not understood me. You think it fit to
give me a present when your step-wife is getting prospered."


"Rama, ascending the throne without hindrance, will either send away Bharata to some
other country or have him put to death. This is certain."


"You sent Bharata to his maternal uncle's house even in his childhood. By being
nearer, love is born even on inanimate objects. By sending Bharata to a distant place, you made
Dasaratha to have no affection towards him."


"Shatrughna was drawn towards Bharata and went along with him. Just as Lakshmana
joined Rama, Shatrughna joined Bharata."


"We hear that a tree marked down for felling by foresters, when covered by thorny
Ishhiika grass, is saved from this great danger of cutting. So also, Dasaratha might have supported
Bharata if he was staying near to him in Ayodhya."


"Lakshmana protects Rama. Rama protects Lakshmana. Their brotherly love is as famous
as that of Aswini celestials."


"Hence, Rama will not do a sinful act of killing Lakshmana. However there is no
doubt that he will do so in the case of Bharata."


"Hence, I feel that it is better for your son to go to forest directly from his
uncle's house. This is good for you too."


"If Bharata gets his father's kingdom as per law, it will be beneficial to you and
your side of relatives."


"Your youthful son, habituated to comforts, is a natural enemy to Rama. How can
Bharata who failed to achieve his purpose live under control of Rama; whose flourishing object has
been realised?"


"Rama is chasing and bringing down Bharata as a lion chases an elephant-king in
forest. You ought to protect Bharata."


"Previously, you treated Kausalya with disrespect due to arrogance that you were
fortunate. Will not such Kausalya, your rival wife, revenge for that animosity?"


"O, Kaikeyi! The day Rama becomes lord of this earth with its great oceans,
mountains and towns; that day you and your Bharata will get a bad and pitiable position of
ignominy."


"When Rama gets power of the kingdom Bharata will certainly get ruined. Hence, think
of a solution to get your son Bharata the kingdom and to send Rama, your enemy, to exile."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Kaikeyi spoke harsh words to that king, who was struck by cupid's arrows and yielded
to hasty lust.


"Oh, King! no body has insulted me, nor despised me. But I have a certain, desire
that needs to be fulfilled by you."


"If you wish to fulfil my desire, you promise to fulfil it. After your promise I
shall inform you that which is desired by me."


The most majestic and lustful Dasaratha smiled a little and caressingly kept his
hand into her hair and spoke these words to Kaikeyi who was having white smile in her face.


"Oh, proud woman! Don't you know that there is nobody on this earth more dearer to
me than you except Rama, the best among men."


"Rama cannot be defeated by enemies. He is a very important person in our family. He
is the supporter of life and a high souled man. I take oath by him. Tell me what is desired by
you".


"Oh, Kaikeyi ! I can't live even for a moment without seeing Rama. This is certain.
By that Rama, I am taking my oath and promising to fulfill your word".


"I desire the well being of Rama, the best of men, even at the cost of my life or
the lives of my other sons. I take oath by that Rama and tell you that I shall fulfil your
word."


"Oh, auspicious lady! My heart is sinking. You raise it by your touch. Oh, Kaikeyi!
you observe all this and tell me that which you think as good."


"You need not doubt me as you know your authority over me. I am taking oath on my
auspiciousness. I shall do whatever is desired by you."


That Kaikeyi, who has utmost desire for coronation of Bharata and for sending Rama
to exile, revealing that wish from her mind, uttered unspeakable wordswith bias and delight.


Kaikeyi, having been delighted with Dasaratha's words, conveyed him of the very
horrible wish in her mind as conveying the news of a suddenly befallen death.


"Let thirty three celestials with the god of Fire in the forefront hear your words
giving boons to me, preceded by series of your oaths"


"Let your words be heard by sun, moon, sky, planets, day, night, the directions,
universe, earth, celestial musicians, demons, spirits wandering in nights , house-gods and other
spirits."


"King Dasaratha, who has true promise, who has great valour, who knows righteousness
and who has good equanimity of mind, is giving boon to me. Let the celestials hear it for my
sake."


Kaikeyi made Dasaratha to hear these words, praised him too much and thereafter
spoke these words to him who was ready to give boons as he was infatuated by lust.


"Oh, King! Remember what happened in the battle between celestials and demons in the
olden times. There the enemy destroyed almost every thing except your life".


"Oh, King! There, I saved you. Hence you gave boon to myself who was attentive in
trying to save you."


"Oh, King! The protection of the Earth, the one who has true promise! I am hunting
for those boons, which were given by you and kept with you for safe custody."


"You have to give that boon, as per right, to me as promised by you. If you despise
me by not giving it, I should abandon my life now itself".


Dasaratha, after having thus yielded in full measure to kaikeyi's words, fell into
her trap as a deer, for his self destruction.


There-afterwards, Kaikeyi spoke these words to Dasaratha who was ready to give boons
and who was infatuated by lust: "Oh, King! the lord of Earth, now only I am asking for those boons
which were given by you then. Listen to my words".


"All arrangements have been made to undertake Rama's coronation. Let my Bharata
instead be coronated on this occasion itself".


"Now, the time has arrived for the second boon given by you affectionately then in
the battle between celestials and demons."


"Rama has to take refuge in the forest of Dandaka for fourteen years and let him
become an ascetic wearing rags, deer skin and matted hair".


"Now itself, Bharata has to get rights of succession to kingdom, which is free of
enemies. This is my greatest desire. Now I am asking for the boon given by you in earlier. "


"Oh King of the Kings, Dasaratha ! Be true to your promise and protect your caste,
character and birth. Are not the ascetics tell that for human beings to get happiness in another
world, they have to speak only the truth."

undefined

undefined

undefined


As Rama the tiger among men, having paid obeisance with joined palms departed, a
great cry of distress arose among women of inner apartments.


Where is he going, who was the path, who became the protector of the people, who are
now defenseless weak and unhappy?"


"Where has he gone, who was not angry even when provoked, who resolved every
misunderstanding and who propitiated all those who were angry by sharing their suffering?


That illustrious and great-souled Rama, who treated us with the same reverence he
paid to his own mother, where has he gone?"


"Where has he gone, he the protector of the people and the whole world, driven to
the forest by the king, goaded on by Kaikeyi? ''


"Alas! In his folly, the king has banished the virtuous the beloved and the strictly
truthful Rama to the forest!"


Thus did all the queens lament, like unto cows deprived of their calves and in there
affection cried out loudly.


Hearing those terrible crying sounds in the private apartments, the king profoundly
afflicted by the departure of his son, became increasingly depressed.


On the departure of Rama to the forest, the sacred fires were no longer performed,
no house holder prepared food, the people did not do their acts and even the sun went into
eclipse.


Elephants threw out the morsels of food they had taken into their mouths. Cows did
not give suck to their calves. Mother did not rejoice, for having got a son born for the first
time.


Trisanku, Lohintanga, Brihaspati as also Budha and all other planets assumed a
menacing aspect and got stayed with the moon.


Stars ceased to twinkle. Planets were deprived of their splendour. The stars of
Visakha appeared in the heaven, veiled in the mist.


The great ocean rose, as by a speed of a long-lasting tempest. While Rama went to
the forest, that city was shaken.


All the cardinal points, having been disturbed, were covered by darkness. Planets
did not become visible, nor the stars nor any other thing in heaven.


All the people of the city suddenly became apathetic. No one was interested in
either food or in pastime.


All the people of Ayodhya, afflicted by grief in succession, heaved profound and
burning sighs and bewailed about the departure of the Lord of the earth.


The people in the king's way were wearing distressed faces filled with tears. No one
appeared rejoicing. All were possessed by grief.


The wind was not blowing coolly. The moon did not appear beneficient. The sun did
not give out warmth to the earth. The entire world was in disorder


Sons did not ask for their mothers and husbands did not ask for their wives.
Brothers did not enquire about their sisters. All gave up every thing and thought of Rama
alone.


Then, all of Rama's own friends were bewildered in mind and the weight of their
agony overwhelmed them. They did not leave their beds.


Afflicted by fear and grief, the earth with its mountains, deprived of that great
souled Rama, suffered a terrible convulsion, as when it is abandoned by Indra the lord of rain, and
a great uproar reigned in the city which was filled with elephants, warriors and horses.


Thus completes 41th chapter in the AyodhyaKanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Seetha daughter of Janaka being pacified by Rama in the matter of living in the
forest, spoke the following words to her husband.


Distressed and highly agitated, the said Seetha reproached Rama having a broad
chest, from affection and pride in the following words:-


"What my father, the king of Mithila belonging to the country of Videha, think of
himself having got as so-in-law you, a woman having the form of a man?"


"It is a pity if these people of Ayodhya through ignorance tell the falsehood that
excellent valour is lacking in Rama as in a blazing sun."


"For what reason are you cast down or whence fear in you, for which you are willing
to desert me, for whom there is no other recourse."


"Oh, Brave man! Know me to be as dependent on your will as Savitri who was devoted
to Satyavan the son of Dyumatsena."


"Rama, the faultless man! I will not see, even in thought, anyone except you as any
other woman bringing disrepute to her family would! I shall accompany you to the forest."


" Oh, Rama! I am a young girl, lived for a long time with you, a chaste woman and
your wife. How would you like an actor intend to deliver me to oehrs by your own will?"


"Oh, Rama the sinless one! Be you always dutiful and obedient to him, whom you speak
of welfare, for whose sake I am being kept back.(But it is improper to ask me to stay obedient to
him)."


"It is not proper for you as such to set out to the forest without taking me. Any
term of austerities or forest or even heaven, let it be to me with you only."


"To me, who follow you behind, there will be no tiresomeness. I shall remain in the
path without any fatigue, as remaining in a place of recreation or as in a sleep.


"While walking with you, blades of kusha grass, shrubs by the name of kaasa, reeds
and rushes and plants with prickles which fall in the path will touch my soles like a heap of
cotton or soft deerskin."


"Oh, beloved! I shall reckon the dust raised by the strongest wind that will cover
my body as sandal dust of highest advantage."


"While dwelling in the forest, in its midst, I shall lie down on green grass. Will
lying in beds with carpets be more comfortable than that?"


"Leaves, tubers and fruits either a little or abundant in quantity brought and given
by you yourself will be like nectar to me."


"Enjoying the flowers and fruits belonging to various seasons there, I shall neither
recollect my mother nor father nor my home."


"Hence, you are not justified to see anything unpleasant there. There will be no
annoyance to you because of me. I will not be difficult to be maintained."


"Your companionship will be a heaven to me. Without you, it will be a hell. Oh,
Rama! By knowing thus my great love, obtain supreme joy with me."


"On the contrary, if you do not take me, who is not alarmed of the forest as such, I
shall drink poison now itself. But on no account would I bow to the enemies."


"Oh, Lord! As a result of grief I will not going to live even afterwards when
abandoned by you. Death is therefore better at the time of your relinquishment itself."


"I cannot bear this grief even for a moment, why again fourteen years in
misery."


Seetha, burnt by grief, having got exerted, lamented much piteously, embraced her
husband and cried a lot with loud voice.


persecuted with many homilies like a female elephant pierced with poisoned arrows,
she shed tears that had long been held back even as a piece of wood would emit fire(throught
attrition with another)


Crystal-like tears woozed from her eyes because of grief, like water-drops from two
lotus flowers.


Her face with shining brilliance of the moon and having longish eyes, withered with
tears as a lotus flower pulled out from water.


Then Rama embraced her, with arms, who was depressed and had fainted as it were,
spoke the following words, fully reassuring her.


"Oh, queen! I do not relish even heaven while you are in grief. There is indeed no
fear whatsoever to me, like the god of Brahma.'


"Oh, Seetha with the auspicious face! Eventhough I am able to protect you, without
knowing your entire opinion, I do not like to take you to the forest."


"Oh, Seetha! it appears that you are created indeed for dwelling in the forest with
me. Hence, you cannot be left behind by me, like the honour by a man of self-regard."


"Oh Seetha, with thighs like the posteriors of an elephant! Earlier, righeousness
(like fulfilling the father's command) was practised by good men. Now, I shall follow that
righteousness, like Suvarchala(wife of the sun) following the sun."


"Oh, Seetha! I cannot desist from not going to forest. That word, of my father, made
strong by his truthfulnes is taking me to the forest."


"Oh, comely lady! Being obedient to father and mother is one's sacred duty. That is
why, I do not wish to survive, in violation of that duty."


"Mother, father and teacher are at our own disposal. By negelecting them as such,
how can we worship god, who is not at our disposal, by various modes?"


"Oh, lady with enchanting glances! The triad of mother, father and teacher is the
world-triad. There is none other in the world equal to it. Hence, this triad is worthy of
worship."


"Oh, Seetha! In which manner service to father is regarded as strengthening, in the
same manner truth or sacrificial rites where presents are received by officiating priest are not
strengthening."


"By compliance with the wishes of one's elders, heavenly bliss or riches, foodgrains
or leaving, sons or amenities of life - nothing whatsoever is hard to obtain."


"High souled men, wholly devoted to their parents obtain the regions of gods and the
gandharvas, the seventh heaven presided the gandharvas, the seventh heaven presided by Brahma (the
creator) and Goloka (the highest heaven abiding in cows and presided over by Sri Radha and Sri
Krishna the first couple).


"I desire to obey in the same manner as to how my father, abiding in truthfulness
and virtue, commands me. That itself is indeed the law of morality, which is eternal."


"Oh, Seetha! My mind was depressed to take you to the forest of Dandaka. But you are
saying that you will reside in the forst, duly determined to follow me."


"Oh, mistress with fascinating eyes and flawless limbs! Since you were allowed to
come to forest, Oh Seetha the timid lady, follow me and become my help-mate."


"Oh, Seetha the beautiful! You adopted very auspicious resolve, suitable in all ways
to me and to your race."


"Oh, lady with charming hip and loins! Now itself, begin with duties appropriate for
living in exile. Oh, Seetha! Even a heaven is not a liking to me without your presence."


"Give valuable gifts to Brahmanas and food to mendicants. Be very quick. Do not
delay."


"Give to the various classes of your dependents whatever costly ornaments, beautiful
and fine articles of wearing apparel, gadgets used for sports, my couches, conveyances and other
articles left after satisfying brahmanas."


Seetha the divine lady, elated to know her departure acceptable to her husband,
quickly set about, making gifts.


Thereafter, the illustrious and pure-minded lady, becoming delighted on hearing the
speech of her husband, started giving riches and valuable gifts to virtuous souls.

undefined

undefined

undefined


The lives of those citizens, who had returned dejected and cheerless in this way
after accompanying Rama were greatly hurt, having their eyes filled with tears afflicted with
grief, longing to give up their lives and appeared as though they were dead.


Reaching each his own house, all of them surrounded by their sons and wife, shed
tears, their faces being covered by them.


None was either delightful or merry. Merchants no longer exhibited their wares, nor
their merchandise looked charming. Those in charge of home did not attend to cooking.


None was delightful for instance on finding out a lost fortune, or on getting riches
in abundance. No mother did rejoice even on obtaining a son born for the first time.


Oppressed with sorrow and weeping, women in every house heaped reproaches on their
husbands who came home, with words as sharp as pricks of the goad which attack an elephant.


"What purpose of theirs who do not see Rama, will be served by their dwellings, wife
or wealth or sons or pleasures even?"


Lakshmana alone is a good man in this world, who was accompanying Rama belonging to
Kakutstha dynasty, along with Sita ,duly rendering service to them in the forest."


"Fortunate too are the rivers; lotus ponds and lakes for bathing in whose sacred
waters Rama entered into."


"Forests with beautiful row of trees, tracks of land abounding in water, rivers and
mountains with alluring peaks will bring splendor to Rama."


"Any mountain or forest which Rama will visit, will not fail to respect him like a
beloved guest who has arrived."


"Plants with many -colored flowers as their chaplets, bearing copious clusters of
blossoms full of bees exhibit themselves at Rama."


"Even in unseasonable ness, mountains in compassion will present principal flowers
and fruits to Rama, on his arrival."


"Mountains will show various wonderful waterfalls again and again, duly streaming
forth uncontaminated waters."


"Trees on apex of mountains will enrapture Rama. Where there is Rama, there is
neither fear nor humiliation".


"That Rama the son of Dasaratha, the hero and the mighty armed will come to our view
not far from us. Let us run after him."


"The shelter of the feet of the lord and the high-souled Rama is in itself a joy.
Rama indeed is the protector of all of us, he the refuge and our supreme asylum "


"We shall serve Sita; while you attend on Rama." Thus, the citizen's wives,
afflicted with agony, spoke in so many words to their husbands.


"Rama will secure the needs and interests of yours in the forest, while Sita will do
the same thing with regard to us womenfolk."


"Who will be highly pleased with this residence in the city, which is apprehensible,
with anxious people in it and not being a pleasant spot with unsettled minds?"


"If it were to be the rule of Kaikeyi, it will not be in consonance with
righteousness, with no protector and indeed with no use for our lives, mush less for our sons and
riches."


"Whom else Kaikeyi will not abandon? --that Kaikeyi, by whom her son and her husband
were forsaken for the sake of power and who brought disgrace to her family."


"We swear even by our sons that while Kaikeyi is surviving and as long as we live,
we will never inhabit this kingdom as Kaikeyi's servants!"


"Who can live happily on having obtained (as one's ruler) that impious woman of
wicked conduct, who banished the son of the king without any pity?"


"The whole of this kingdom, without any leader, having no support and visited by
calamities, will meet with ruin because of Kaikeyi's fault."


"For, Rama having gone into exile, the monarch will not survive and when Dasaratha
is dead, utter regrets will remain thereafter. It is certain!"


"So, drink poison duly stirred up, since your merits are exhausted and you are
marked out by ill fortune. Otherwise, follow Rama to forest or reach a place where even the name of
Kaikeyi may not reach your ears."


"Rama has been sent to exile along with Sita and Lakshmana deceitfully. We have been
handed over now to Bharata, like the beasts in the hands of a slaughterer."


"Rama, whose face is like the full moon, of dark brown complexion, whose collar-bone
is invisible (because of its being covered with flesh), a conqueror of foes, whose arms descend to
his knees, whose eyes resemble lotuses, the elder brother of Lakshmana, who takes initiative in
speaking and expresses with sweetness, truthful of speech and possessed of extra ordinary strength,
is benevolent to all, delightfully charming as the moon, that tiger among men, as mighty as an
elephant in rut, that great car-warrior, will surely adorn the woods, while roaming through
them.."


Those wives of citizens in the city of Ayodhya, lamenting as aforesaid, began
weeping, as though fear has cropped up for a forth-coming death.


The sun sank below the horizon and the night fell, while the women in the houses
were weeping in that manner about Rama.


The city of Ayodhya, in which the kindling of fires had ceased and the chanting of
Vedas and narration of sacred stories died out, looked as though it was coated with darkness at
that time.


The city of Ayodhya, in which the business of the trading class had come to a
stand-still, in which joy had been faded out, which had become (now) support less, looked dim as
though stars had disappeared in the sky.


The women whose minds became sick on account of Rama, as one would feel on one's own
son or brother having been sent into exile, cried miserably expressing their grief in various ways.
To them, Rama was dearer than their very sons!


That city of Ayodhya, in which singing, rejoicing, dancing and instrumental music
had been completely set at rest, when jpy had departed forever and whose shops had been closed,
looked at that time like a grat ocean whose waters had dried up.

undefined

undefined

undefined


After Vasistha left, Rama took bath and meditated on Lord Narayana with undistracted
mind along with his wide-eyed wife, Seetha.


Taking the vessel with clarified butter on his head as per scriptures, he offered to
Lord Vishnu the clarified butter, by dropping it into the blazing fire.


Rama ate the remainder of clarified butter after finishing the sacrifice, which he
performed for his own good, silently meditated on Lord Narayana with controlled mind and slept
along with Seetha on a properly laid bed of Kusa grass in a splendid temple of Lord Vishnu. *


Rama woke up three hours before dawn and caused to complete the entire decoration of
the house.


Listening to the pleasing verses of professional reciters, he worshipped the early
sunrise and meditated on Gayatri* with an undistracted mind.


He praised Lord Vishnu by bowing his head before Him. By wearing pure silk clothes,
he got valedictory text recited by Brahmans.


Their deep and sweet chorus of the valedictory, united with the accompanying musical
instruments, then filled the city of Ayodhya.


All the people residing in Ayodhya were delighted when they heard that Rama and
Seetha had observed fast for the ensuing anointment ceremony.


All the citizens decorated the town for coronation function of Rama, soon before
sunrise.


Banners and colorful flags were hoisted on temples, which looked brilliantly like
the silver lining of cloud, at road junctions, in streets, on big trees situated in temple
compounds, from watching towers at city gates, on shops of wealthy merchants, on buildings of rich
family persons, on all assembly halls and all visible trees.


From different sides, actors were showing their talents, dancers were performing
dance. Singers were singing and sweet voices were heard, pleasing the minds and ears.


With Rama's anointment ceremony approaching, people were engaged in mutual
conversations in their houses and at road junctions, about the ceremony.


Even children playing together before gateways of houses were telling each other,
narratives of Rama's anointment ceremony.


The citizens made king's road splendid, by sprinkling flowers on it and by making it
good smelling with burning of incense and perfumes, on the occasion of Rama's anointment
ceremony.


On a doubt of approach of night on completion of the ceremony, they arranged lamps
in the shape of trees to illuminate all the streets.


All the citizens residing in Ayodhya, having thus decorated the city desiring Rama's
coronation, gathered together in groups at road junctions and in assembly halls, mutually talking
about this matter there and praising king Dasaratha.


"O! This king Dasaratha, who delights Ikshvaaku dynasty, having known himself that
he became aged, is going to anoint Rama for the kingdom. What a great man he is!"


"Rama; who has seen the totality of the world is going to become our protector for
long. We have all been blessed by king Dasaratha."


"Rama is modest, knowledgeable and righteous. He is as compassionate to us as to his
brothers."


"Let the faultless and righteous king Dasaratha live long! Due to his blessings, we
are going to see Rama as being anointed for the kingdom."


The villagers, who came from different directions after hearing the news of
coronation ceremony of Rama, listened to the narration of the citizens of Ayodhya.


The city of Ayodhya was filled with villagers who came from different directions to
see the anointment ceremony of Rama.


The noise in the city was heard by the groups of those people, while moving here and
there, as the roaring of an impetuous ocean on full moon days.


That city of Ayodhya equal to the residence of the celestial god Indra, disturbed
with the sound being made all over by the villagers who came with the desire to see the ceremony,
shone like a roaring ocean filled with sea animals.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Hearing Rama's words, Bharata replied as follows: "What will the discharge of royal
duties amount to me, who is outside of that code?"


"O, the foremost of men! O, Majesty! It has been ever the established tradition in
us that while the elder son is there, the younger one cannot become a king."


"O, Rama! Therefore, come to the prosperous Ayodhya along with me and get anointed
in kingdom for the welfare of our race."


"The king, whom people speak of as a human being and whose conduct is in conformity
with righteousness and worldly prosperity, they declare as super- human, is conceded by me as a
god-head."


"While I was there in Kekaya kingdom and you had proceeded tot he forest, the king
Dasaratha, the revered one who was given to the performance of sacrifices and was honoured by the
virtuous, has gone to heaven."


"Hardly were you gone with Seetha and Lakshmana, than the king succumbed to
misfortune and grief and ascended to the most sacred heaven."


"Arise, O the Tiger among men! Let the traditional libations of water be offered to
our father. Shatrughna and I have previously done it."


"O, Rama! It is said that the one given by an affectionate son becomes measureless
and you undoubtedly are beloved to our father."


"Entirely abandoned by you, lamenting about you, desirous of beholding you, being
not able to turn away his mind absorbed in you alone, immersed in grief of you and recollecting
you, your father died."

undefined

undefined

undefined


King Dasaratha, accepted their salutations with folded hands resembling lotus buds
and spoke good and agreeable words to them as follows:-


"Oh! I am very much pleased and incomparable is my fortune in that you desire my
beloved elder son to be anointed as prince. "


King Dasaratha, thus duly returning the honor done by them, spoke while they were
listening, to Vasishta, Vamadeva and other Brahmans as follows:


"This is the glorious and auspicious month of Chaitra, in which the forests bloom
with flowers. Let all arrangements be made for the coronation of Rama as prince." While these words
of the king were being completed, there was a great delightful uproar of the people.


When their applause gradually subsided, King Dasaratha spoke the following words to
the best of sages, Vasishta.


"Oh Divine Vasishta! Be pleased to order now for the traditional ceremonial that is
to be done and various accessories needed for the anointing ceremony of Rama."


Vasishta, the best of Brahmans, hearing the words of king Dasaratha, ordered the
officers who stood there with folded hands before the king, as follows: -


"Gather the following in the sacred fire house of the king at dawn: gold and the
like, diamonds, things needed to perform worship, various herbs, white floral garlands, corn, honey
and clarified butter in separate vessels, new clothes, chariot, all weapons, the four divisions of
army, an elephant with auspicious signs, white fan, flag staff, white umbrella, one hundred golden
pots with brilliant shine, bull with gilded horns and a complete tiger skin".


"If any other small things are required, arrange for all of them. Let the doorways
of the royal palace and those of the entire city be worshipped with sandalwood paste, floral
garlands and good smelling incense."


"Let fine rice of good quality with milk and yogurt, fully sufficient for one
hundred thousand Brahmans be arranged."


"Let that rice be given with due respect to important Brahmans tomorrow at dawn;
along with clarified butter, yogurt, corn, and lot of gifts."


"There will be an invocation for the well being of all, tomorrow at sun rise. Let
brahmanas be invited and suitable seats be arranged for them."


"Let the flags be hung and the royal highways be sprinkled with water. Let well
dressed dancers and musicians wait in second enclosure in the royal compound."


"As worshipping is to be done in temples and at road junctions, let some deserving
people gather there with rice, eatables, presents and garlands separately."


"Let all the warriors enter the well developed front yard of the royal palace with
long swords, armors and clean clothing."


Those wise men Vasishta and Vamadeva attentively ordered for all those things to be
done there, informed that to king Dasaratha and performed the remaining things also.


Pleased and satisfied with the arrangements made Vasishta and Vamadeva approached
king Dasaratha and told him that all had been done according to his words.


Afterwards, Dasaratha spoke to Sumantra "Let Rama, who has a disciplined intellect,
be brought by you immediately."


As commanded by the king, Sumantra brought there, Rama, the best of charioteers, in
a chariot.


Afterwards the kings belonging to east, west, north, south as well as those
belonging to Mlechha kingdom, Aryaa Vartha kingdom and those ruling in hill and forest areas sat
there and attended on King Dasaratha as celestials attended on Devendra.


The sage king Dasaratha, sitting in the midst of those kings like Devendra in the
middle of the celestials, saw from the palace itself, his son Rama arriving in a chariot.


Rama was as beautiful as the king of Gandharvas. His valiance was world famous. He
had great strength and walked like a vigorous elephant. He had long arms, and with his enchanting
face, he looked like the moon. He stole the eyes and minds of the people by his looks, generosity
and virtues. King Dasaratha was thus not satiated enough in seeing Rama, coming like a cloud that
gladdens people by relieving them from the scorching summer heat.


Sumantra helped Rama to get down from the excellent chariot and with folded hands
followed behind Rama, who approached his father.


Rama, the best among men, ascended the steps of the palace, which resembled Mount
Kailaasa, along with Sumantra, to see the king Dasaratha.


Rama with folded hands approached his father, bowed down mentioning his own name and
offered salutations to his father's feet.


King Dasaratha took into his embrace that beloved son who was standing humbly beside
him with folded hands.


King Dasaratha gave Rama a great throne, which was high, excellent and beautiful,
decorated with gold and diamonds.


Rama, occupying that great throne, caused it to shine with his own brightness, just
as the spotless sun in the morning causes Meru mountain to shine with brilliance.


Rama by his brilliance made that assembly to shine, just as the moon shines the
clear autumnal sky, with the dimless stars and planets.


King Dasaratha was as delighted in seeing his beloved son, as one delights in seeing
oneself adorned, in a mirror.


King Dasaratha, the best among those who have sons, smilingly conversed with his
son, and addressed Rama as follows, as Kasyapa does to (his eldest son) Devendra (the ruler of
gods).


"Oh Rama! You are an exemplary son born to my exemplary elder wife. Being excellent
in virtues, you are beloved son to me."


"O, Rama! As you with your good qualities cherished these people, you get the
princely kingdom on the day of Pushyami star (when the moon appears in conjunction with the
constellation Pushya).."


"Oh, son! By nature, you are very humble and virtuous. Even then, because of my
friendship with you, I can tell you this for your benefit."


"Be even more humble and always keep the senses under control. Leave the bad habits
born out of desire and wrath."


"Through direct and indirect means, keep ministers and others happy."


"Like the celestials becoming happy after obtaining the nectar, friends of a king
(ruler of earth) are delighted when he fills the granaries and armories to the brim, making the
common people delightful and happy. Hence, you too act like this."


The well -wishers of Rama, after hearing those words, intending to do good to
Kausalya, immediately came to her and informed the matter to her.


The best among women, Kausalya gave away gold, cows and different types of diamonds
to those who informed her good news.


Rama, after offering salutations to king Dasaratha, ascended the chariot and went to
his splendid house after being worshipped by the crowds on the way.


Having heard those words of the king, seeing their dearest wish gratified, the
citizens took leave of the King Dasaratha and returned to their homes full of joy, in order to give
thanks and render homage to the Gods.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, Kausalya afflicted with grief of her son and seeing the king lying down
depressed with sorrow, spoke to the monarch as follows:


"Having planted her poison on Rama the tiger among men, indeed Kaikeyi of crooked
ways will surely wander about freely like a female serpent that has cast off its slough"


"Having fulfilled her desire of expelling Rama to the forest, Kaikeyi the charming
woman will frighten by clamping down upon me, like a dangerous serpent in the house."


"Even giving my son to her as a slave would have been better. By that Rama would
have at least stayed in the house by doing the work entrusted by her and roaming about in the city,
asking alms.


"Having willfully thrown Rama out of his position, Kaikeyi has acted in the same way
as one who tends the sacred fire throws a part of the sacrifice to ogres on a new or full
moon."


Together with his wife, accompanied by Lakshmana and walking like king of elephants
having a bow in hand, the mighty armed hero surely will have entered the forest "


" In the forest, what fate will befall them who had never seen such a suffering
before and who have been sent by you to a forest life as per the wishes of Kaikeyi?"


"Devoid of riches, those youthful beings, in exile at the age when they should be
enjoying diversions of every kind, how are they to live in misery, having only roots and fruits for
their nourishment?"


"When that auspicious hour will come to me that will bring an end to my sorrows and
I shall see Rama with his wife and brother returning here?"


"When will Ayodhya regain her pristine glory, with people thrilling with rapture and
be adorned with rows of towering banners the moment it hears of the two heroic princes (Rama and
Lakshmana) being present ? "


"When will the city rejoice like an ocean swelling jubilantly on a full moon night
to perceive the two princes who are tigers among men come back from the forest? "


"When will the mighty armed hero (Rama) enter the city of Ayodhya placing Sita in
his front in the chariot as a bull would follow a cow?"


"When will thousands of men shower the parched grains of paddy on the royal highway
over my two sons (Rama and Lakshmana) the subduer of their enemies, entering the city?"


"When shall I see the two princes adorned with splendid ear-rings and armed with
excellent bows and swords, entering Ayodhya like a pair of mountains crowned with peaks?"


"When will those two princes with Sita merrily go round the city clockwise, giving
away flowers and fruits to virgins and brahmanas?"


"When will the pious Rama, grown ripe in intellect and shining like a god in point
of age ,return to me, cherishing the world like the proportious and timely rain?"


"Undoubtedly in some past life, through mean-mindedness, Oh, valiant king, I believe
that the teats of cows were cut off by me while their calves were longing to suck them."


"Oh, tiger among heroes! Fond of my child like a cow, I, as such was forcibly
deprived of my child by Kaikeyi in the same way as a cow having a calf of tender age may be
deprived of her calf by a lion."


"I cannot indeed wish to survive without my only son who is adorned with all virtues
and is well-versed in all scriptures."


"There is not the least capacity imaginable in me to sustain my life here so long as
I fail to perceive my beloved son (Rama) who is mighty armed and Lakshmana of great strength"


"This fire born of grief occasioned by separation from my son, is torturing me in
the same way as the illustrious sun, possessed of greatest splendor, scorches this earth with its
rays in summer."


Thus completes 43rd chapter in the Ayodhya Kanda of the glorious Ramayana of
Valmiki, the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Having dwelt for some time in that mountain, Rama, who resembled God, who liked
mountains and groves, who desired Seetha's happiness and himself delightful in his mind, began to
point out the beauty of Chitrakuta to his consort, as Indra the god of celestials converses with
Shachi the wife of Indra, saying:


"O, my good lady! By seeing this beautiful mountain, neither the loss of kingdom nor
the non-existence of friends distresses my mind."


"O, my good lady! Behold this mountain, abounding with flocks of birds of every kind
where minerals lie and crowned with peaks that seem to project upwards to the sky."


"Some areas of the mountain are encrusted with minerals, having appearance of
silver, some resembling blood, some yellowish, some red as madder, some sparkle like precious
stones, some possessing, the luster of topaz and crystal and a hue of Ketaka flower and some
sparkle with the splendour of a kind of gem called Jyotirasa."


"The mountain is filled with tame beasts of every kind, tigers, panthers and bears,
and is enlivened by a flock of many birds."


"This mountain abounds with such type of trees as mangoes, rose-apples and Asanas
laden with flowers and fruits, affording magnificient shade, and pleasing to the mind, Lodhras,
Priyalas (commonly called Payals), bread-fruit trees, Dhavas, Ankolas, Bhavyas and Tinisas, Bilvas
(Bel trees), Tindukas and bamboos, Kashmaris, margosas and Varaas, Madhukas; Tilaks, jujube trees,
emblic myrobalans, Kadamoos, came, Dhanvanas and pomegranates, enhancing its beauty."


"O, my good lady! See these Kinnaras, thrilling to be looked at, in their high
spirits, wandering in couples in these lovely mountain-plains."


"Behold their swords hanging on the trees, their excellent swords and the charming
retreats, where vidyadharas and their women sport."


"This mountain resembles an elephant with ichors flowing from its forehead, as from
its crevices, springs and cascades flow here and there."


"Who would not be filled with delight, by these glades from which fragrance of
various flowers issues, pleasing to the senses?"


"O, irreproachable lay! If I am live with you and Lakshmana for many autumns here,
grief will not overpower me."


"O, Seetha! Seeing this mountain laden with many flowers and fruit, the enchanting
resort of flocks of birds as also the ravishing peaks of the mountain, I am really captivated."


"By residing in the forest, a two-fold advantage is secured by me; freedom from debt
to my father in regards my duty and Bharata's happiness."


"O, Seetha! Are you happy with me on this Chitrakuta mountain, seeing various
objects agreeable to your thought word and temperament?"


"My paternal great grand fathers the ancient royal sages have said that for a king
to obtain liberation after death, such a residence in the forest is nectar like."


"Hundreds and multitude of rocks of this extensive mountain are shining around in
multifarious colours like blue, yellow, white and red."


"Thousands of herbs of this Chitrakuta mountain, glittering with their lovely light,
are sparkling like points of fire."


"O, Seetha! Some parts of this mountain resemble mansions, some look like parks and
some others appear like a single pile."


"Chitrakuta appears as though emerged, having split the earth. This summit of
Chitrakuta appears charming on all sides."


"See the leaves of lilies, Sthagara trees, Punnaga trees and Bhurja trees heaped
with flowers of water-lilies form the cozy beds of voluptuaries."


"O, Seetha! Look at the garlands of lotus-flowers crushed and thrown aside by
voluptuaries as also fruits of every kind that have been tasted."


"This mountain f Chitrakuta with its abundance of roots fruits and water is more
beautiful than Vasvankasara better known as Alaka the capital of Kubera the Lord of Riches, Nalini
the capital of Indra (the God of celestials) better known as Amaravati and Uttarakuru the country
of Eternal Beatitude."


"O, Seetha! Strolling with you and Lakshmana during this period of exile, on my part
established in the path of the pious, following the highest salutary practices, I shall obtain joy,
enhancing the piety of my race."

undefined

undefined

undefined


On that very night those messengers entered the city; Bharata also had experienced
an unpleasant dream.


Bharata, the son of Dasaratha the paramount sovereign, after seeing that unpleasant
dream just at the dawn of that night, felt very much anguished.


Knowing Bharata to have been in anguish, his graceful speaking friends arranged
recitation of stories in the palace; so as to erase his anguish.


Some played musical instruments for bringing about peacefulness. Likewise some
others arranged for exhibition of dramas and some others told various types of jokes.


That high-soled Bharata born in Raghu Dynasty could not be made cheerful by his
gently speaking friends by stage-plays or jokes.


A close friend spoke to Bharata, who was surrounded by his companions, as follows,
"O, friend! Why are you not rejoicing, even when entertained by your friends?"


Bharata replied to the friend who spoke thus, as follows "You listen to me the
reason for which this depression came to me"


"I have seen a dream in which my father with his soiled body and with his hair
disheveled, was falling from the top of a mountain into a polluted pond defiled with cow dung.


"He was seen by me, as he was floating in that pond defiled with cow dung, drinking
an oil through his hollowed palms and laughing again and again"


"Thereafter, having eaten cooked rice mixed with gingelly seeds repeatedly, with his
head bent down and with his whole body smeared with oil, he plunged into the oil itself


"I saw in the dream, the ocean dry up, the moon fall on the ground, the earth
molested as if covered by darkness, a tusk of an elephant (on which the monarch rode) broken to
pieces, a blazing fire suddenly extinguished, the earth riven, the various trees dry up, and the
mountains whirl up into a mist."


"I saw my father in the dream, wearing black clothes, sitting on a stool made of
iron and women with black and reddish brown complexion deriding the king."


"My father, the virtuous man, adorned with red garlands and his body besmeared with
sandal paste and seated in a chariot drawn by asses, proceeded hurriedly towards the south."


"I saw an ugly faced female demon, wearing red colored clothes, laughingly dragging
away the king.


"This fearful dream was seen thus by me during that night. I myself or the king or
Lakshmana may die."


"If in a dream, a person sees a man going in a chariot, yoked with donkeys, the
smoke of a funeral pyre will soon be seen ascending him."


"For this reason, I have become broken hearted. Hence, I am not able to treat you
properly. My throat seems to be drying up. My mind is not at ease."


"I do not see the root cause of this fear. But I am experiencing a fear indeed. My
voice is choked. My luster is affected. I abhor me myself and I do not see a reason for it."


"That great fear is not going away from my heart, having seen such a course of this
bad dream in varied forms and which dream was not imagined by me earlier and also reflecting on
that inconceivable sight of the king."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Then, turning away from the mountain, Rama (The prospective ruler of Kosala) showed
Seetha (the daughter of the King of Mithila) the beautiful river of Mandakini carrying splendid
waters.


The lotus-eyed Rama spoke to Seetha, (the daughter of Janaka) who was having an
elegant waist and whose face resembled the moon:


"Behold this charming river of Mandakini, with its multi-coloured sandy beaches,
frequented by swans and geese and laden with flowers."


"Behold this river, hedged on all sides with various kinds of flowers and fruits,
growing on its banks and enhance its loveliness like the lake (Sangadhika) of Kubera (the ruler of
Yakshas)"


"At this moment, its pleasant fords, where herds of deer drink and make the waters
turbid, create ecstasy in me."


"O, beloved Seetha! Sages with matted locks and wearing antelope-skins and having
bark of trees for their upper garment, take a dip in the River Mandakini, at the appointed
hour."


"O, Lady of wide eyes! Here are some other sages of austere vows, worshipping the
sun with uplifted arms; as per the scriptural injunctions."


"The trees, their crowns agitated by the breeze, that shower down leaves and flowers
on both sides of the river cause the mountain to appear as though it were dancing!"


"See this River Mandakini with its crystal-like clear water at some places, with its
shining sand-dunes at some places and crowded with Siddhas who are bathing at some other
places."


"Behold you, heaps of flowers shaken down by the wind and shattered. See some other
heaps of flowers floating, O lady with slender waist!"


"O, Kalyani! Behold the sweet-voiced ruddy geese, ascending the banks uttering
harmonious tones."


"I consider this sight of Mandakini River and of Chitrakuta, particularly at your
sight, to be more delightful than dwelling in the City of Ayodhya, O, lovely woman!"


Here are Siddhas (semi-divine beings endowed with mystic powers), free from
impurities and rich in asceticism, with their senses and mind under control, who perpetually stir
the waters. You too should take a dip in the river along with me."


"Enter the Mandakini River, as on the breast of a friend, submerging the red and
white lotuses in it- O, Lovely Seetha!"


"My darling! Think of the wild beasts as inhabitants of the city of Ayodhya, this
mountain of Chitrakuta as the city of Ayodhya and this river as the Sarayu from now on!"


"O, Seetha!; The virtuous Lakshmana is obeying my commands and you too are
well-disposed, causing delight to me."


"Bathing three times a day in the river and living on honey, roots and fruits in
your company, I do not desire for the kingdom nor do I long for Ayodhya now."


"There is none in the world, who would not be relieved of his fatigue and feel
refreshed on the banks of this enchanting river, frequented by herds of elephants, who with lions
and monkeys, come here to drink and which is adorned with innumerable flowers in full bloom."


Describing the varied beauties of the Mandakini River, Rama the bestower of delight
to Raghu dynasty with his beloved consort as a companion, strolled in the lovely mountain of
Chitrakuta which was shining like a piece of collieries."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Rama the glorious man, who was with his joyful friends, ascended the chariot and saw 
the city which was decorated with flags and banners, which was perfumed all around by burning excellent 
aloe wood and which was endowed with varied types of people.

That Rama went through the royal passage which was incensed with aloe wood. That royal 
street was splendid with white houses resembling clouds.

Rama entered that excellent royal route, which was filled with sandal, superior aloe-wood, 
excellent perfumes, silk and linen cloth, heaps of them, unpierced pearls, excellent things made of 
crystal, splendid with various kinds of flowers and eatables and which was not congested.

Rama saw that royal route like divine passage in heaven. All the road junctions there 
were regularly worshipped with yoghurt, unbroken rice, clarified butter, fried grain, incense, aloe 
and sandal and all types of garlands and perfumes.

Hearing the various blessing words spoken by his friends, he went acknowledging all those 
people suitably.

"Get coronated today, take the path followed by your grandfathers and great grandfathers 
and rule the kingdom."

"If Rama becomes king, we shall be more happy than when his father ruled and also when 
his grandfathers ruled.

"If we can see Rama going forth in the city after getting coronated today, it is enough 
of eating or other activities."

"There is no other dearer thing to us than coronation of Rama of unbounded splendour".

Rama, though hearing of these good, words spoken by his friends about himself was passive 
and went in royal route.

Though Rama became distant, no one could turn back one's eyes and mind from him, the 
best of men.

All the people blamed the one who did not see Rama and the one who was not seen by Rama. 
Such a person would blame himself of it.

Rama, the virtuous, had compassion towards all the four classes of men and towards the 
aged people. Hence, they were all devoted to him.

Rama went by crossing road junction, god's paths, sacred trees and temples keeping his 
right side towards them.

Rama approached the royal abode and entered his father's palace which was the best palace 
with blazing radiance like the palace of king of celestials on earth. All around the house, there were 
various types turrets looking like Mount Kailasa, as group of clouds, as white heavenly cars touching 
the sky. There were royal houses named vardhamana which were adorned with a net of precious stones.

Rama the best of men crossed with chariot three enclosures protected by men armed with 
bows and moved over the other two enclosures by foot.

That Rama passed over all the gates, sent all the people back and entered the palace.

When Rama went nearer to his father, all the people there were delighted waiting for 
his return as the ocean waits for raising of the moon.

undefined

undefined

undefined


The sage Vasishta, the excellent one among the speakers having eloquence, spoke to
that Bharata, Kaikeyi's son who was thus tormented with grief.


"O, the greatly illustrious prince! My blessing to you. You have lamented long
enough. Perform in an excellent way, the last rites of the king."


Hearing the words of Vasishta, Bharata conversant with his duty fell prostate and
proceeded with all the arrangements for the obsequies.


Raising the body of king Dasaratha, from the vessel where it had been immersed in
oil, seeming as it were asleep with face in the color of gold, that son Bharata placed it in a
magnificent couch, adorned with every kind of precious stone and in a great grief, lamented.(as
follows):


"O, king! Having sent into exile the virtuous Rama and Lakshmana who is possessed of
great strength, while I was away from home and had not yet returned, what did you intend to
do?"


"Where will you go, leaving this person (me) who was distressed and bereft of Rama
the unwearied one in action and the excellent one among men?"


"O, king! O, father! Who is supposed to see the welfare and security of your city of
Ayodhya, while you have departed for heaven and while Rama has gone, taking refuge in a
forest?"


"O, king! Bereft of you and deprived of its lord, this earth does not look charming.
To me, this city is looking like a night without a moon."


The great sage Vasishta again spoke the following words to that Bharata who was
distressed in mind and thus lamenting.


"O, mighty armed Bharata! Without hesitation or repining, carry out the funeral
rites of the king that should be done."


"Be it so" answered Bharata and obedient to Vasishta's command, he summoned speedily
the appointed priests who were knowing the rules of the funeral rites."


The fires of that king were prepared outside the chamber and kindled in accordance
with the rituals by the priests and the sacrificial attendants.


The attendants were choked with tears in their throats and disconsolate in their
mind, made the dead king to mount on a small palanquin and carried it away.


The people went along the path, scattering silver, gold and various kinds of clothes
in front of the king.


In the same manner, some others brought sandal wood, sweet aloes, different fragrant
essences, with leaps of Sarala Padmaka and Devadaru woods and many other kinds of fragrant
substances, went there and threw them into the funeral pile. Thereafter the appointed priests
caused the king's body to lie down there in the midst of the funeral pyre.


Then, those priests engaged for the benefit of the king poured oblations into the
fire and recited sacred texts (relevant to the funeral rites). Those among the priests, who could
recite the hymns of Samaveda, chanted them according to the rules.


Then, his ladies, encircled by elders mounted palanquins or other vehicles, as
deserving and departed from the city to that place.


Then, the appointed priests as well as Kausalya and other women who were tormented
with grief, circumambulated in anti clockwise direction that king who was lying on a funeral
pile.


At that time the crying sounds of thousands of women, pitiably weeping with agony,
were heard like the sounds of female curlew birds.


Thereafter, the lamenting ladies deprived of their grit wept again and again and
descended from their vehicles at the bank of Sarayu River.


Along with Bharata, the royal women, the ministers and family priests offered their
oblations with water and entered the city with their eyes filled in tears and spent ten days with
great difficulty by sleeping on bare floor.

undefined

undefined

undefined


After encamping the army, the mighty Bharata the excellent among men, sought to
approach on foot, Rama who was complying with the words of his father.


Soon after encamping the army in a well-behaved manner per the guidelines, Bharata
spoke the following words to Shatrughna:


"O, gentle brother! You, along with a troop of men and trackers, ought to search on
all sides of this forest."


"Let Guha search for Rama and Lakshmana in this forest, himself accompanied by a
multitude of his kinsmen, duly wielding their bows, arrows and swords."


"I too, surrounded by the ministers, citizens, priests and Brahmanas; shall
personally go round the entire forest on foot.


"Peace will not be with me until I do not see Rama or the very mighty Lakshmana or
the illustrious Seetha."


"Peace will not be with me until I do not see the auspicious face of my elder
brother, resembling the moon and having eyes bearing resemblance to lotus-leaves.


"Peace will nt be with me until I do not hold firmly on my head, the soles of my
elder brother, bearing royal insignia.


"Peace will not come to me until my elder brother, who is eligible for the crown, is
not installed in the kingdom of Ayodhya, which was derived from our father and grand father and
consecrated by sprinkling water on his head (as a symbol of crowing the kingdom)."


"Lakshmana, who is seeing regularly the face of Rama having a great luminance
resembling the bright moon and having lotus eyes, is indeed an accomplished man."


"Seetha, the illustrious daughter of Janaka, who is following the steps of Rama the
Lord of the earth extending to the sea, has fulfilled her object."


"That enchanting mountain of Chitrakuta resembles the King of Mountains on which
Rama is residing, as Kubera the Lord of riches is living in the garden of Nandana."


"Blessed is this dense forest, inhabited by wild animals, where Rama, the great
warrior and the excellent man among the wielders of weapons, dwells."

undefined

undefined

undefined


As the night was beginning to become dawn, those citizens relinquished by Raghava
were perplexed with grief and became motionless.


Made miserable with tears born of anguish and agony, they could not notice even a
glimmer of Rama, though casting their eyes everywhere.


Their faces distorted with sorrow, deprived as they were of sagacious Rama and
therefore non-pulsed, the citizens broke into piteous exclamations, saying:-


"Cursed be to that slumber, rendered unconscious, by which we could not behold today
that mighty armed Rama with a broad chest."


"How that Rama the strong armed, whose actions are never ineffectual, leave for
exile, abandoning his devoted citizens?"


"How did the chief of Raghus, who protected us ever, like a father the children born
of his loins, could proceed to the forest, leaving us?"


"Let us have recourse to death here itself, or definitely set out for a grand
journey ( to the north with a resolve to die). For what purpose can life be good for us, separated
as we are from Rama?"


" Or there are a number of big dry logs of wood here. Lighting a funeral fire out of
them, let us all enter the fire."


"What shall we say to our fellow citizens? The great armed Rama who is free from
egoism and who speaks kindly ( to all ) has been conveyed to the forest by us!' How can we say
so?"


"Seeing us returning without Rama, that city of Ayodhya, already desolate, will with
its women, children and the aged, become even deeply cheerless."


"Having left the city thus with that hero, the conqueror of one's own self, how can
we look on that city again without him?"


Uplifting their arms , those men stricken with anguish, like cows bereft of their
calves, lamented in various ways as above.


Then, proceeding to some distance along the tracks for a while, they were
overwhelmed with great despair again due to sudden disappearance of tracks.


The good-natured citizens, due to disappearance of the tracks of the chariot,
returned to Ayodhya, saying thus, " How is it? What shall we do? We are afflicted by
providence"


Therafter, all of them with aggrieved hearts went to the city of Ayodhya, which was
comprising of virtuous people with distress, by the same path on which they had come.


Beholding the city, they shed tears through their eyes stricken as they were in
grief , their minds distressed through cheerlessness.


Bereft of Rama, the aforesaid city of Ayodhya was not any more enchanting than a
river whose snakes were uplifted from its pool by Garuda.


As the sky without the moon or the sea without the water, these disconcerted men
beheld the city from which all joy had fled.


Entering their houses full of abundant riches with uneasiness, the citizens could
not distinguish between their own people and others, even though being looked at, stricken as they
were with grief, their joy having altogether extinguished.

undefined

undefined

undefined


After Rama left, king Dasaratha called for his family priest Vasishta and spoke to
him as follows about the ensuing anointment ceremony of the next day.


"O, great sage Vasishta! Please go to the avowed Rama and Seetha today to make them
perform fasting for obtaining prosperity, glory and sovereignty."


Vasista, who is the best of knowers of Veda, who is expert in mantras, who is firm
in austerities and who is divine, said to Dasaratha : "I agree to it" and personally went to Rama's
house on a chariot which was ready and quite suitable for a Brahman; so as to advise Rama to
undertake a fast (with mantras) performed by Rama, a knower of mantras.


That great sage reached Rama's house, which was radiant like a dense white cloud and
entered the three gateways of the house by the chariot itself.


To respect the honorable sage, who arrived, Rama came quickly and hurriedly out of
the house.


Rama quickly got nearer to Vasishta's chariot and personally helped him to alight
from the chariot.


That family priest Vasishta seeing that lovable and humble Rama, spoke the following
words, bringing cheerfulness and happiness to him:


"O, Rama! Your father is delighted with you. You will be getting the princely
kingdom. Hence, you and Seetha perform fasting today."


"Your father; King Dasaratha is anointing you affectionately for the princely
kingdom tomorrow at dawn; even as king Nahusha has done to Yayati".


Vasistha thus spoke to Rama and enjoined him to undertake a vow of fasting together
with Seetha, in the accompaniment of mantras.


Thereafter, Rama worshipped the royal priest Vasistha suitably. Vasistha then got
Rama's permission and left his house.


Rama spent some time by delightedly talking with friends and having been
congratulated by them in various ways went into his palace after taking leave of them.


Then, Rama's house was shining, as brilliantly with delighted men and women, as a
lake filled with opened lotuses and visited by innumerable happy birds.


Vasishta, leaving Rama's house, which seemed like the royal palace, saw the way
filled with people.


All the royal highways in the city of Ayodhya were filled with groups and groups of
delighted people and became congested.


Then, on the royal road, the resonance created by the rush of the people, moving
hither and thither like waves, combined with their rejoicing, resounded like the roar of an
ocean.


On that day, in the city of Ayodhya, all the roads were cleaned and sprinkled with
water. There were rows of trees on both sides of the roads and flags hoisted on houses.


Then, the people of Ayodhya including children, women and the old-aged were waiting
for sunrise, wishing the anointment ceremony of Rama to happen.


In Ayodhya, people were enthusiastic to see the great public function, which was
decorative to the community and which would bring forward an increased joy.


Vasishta, thus seeing the king's way being overcrowded with people, reached the
royal palace slowly by forcing a passage through that crowd.


He walked up the royal palace, which was akin to the top of a mountain enclosed by a
white cloud and met king Dasaratha in the manner Brihaspati met Devendra.


Seeing Vasistha had returned, King Dasaratha alighted from his throne and asked him
with regard to his mission. Vasistha informed him that it was accomplished.


The members of assembly who were sitting along with the king till then, raised in
obeisance to Vasishta from their seats, following the example of the king.


King Dasaratha, after obtaining permission from Vasishta, left that assembly of men
and entered his palace as a lion enters a mountain cave.


That palace with women in top dress and form was like the palace of Devendra. By the
entering of King Dasaratha, the palace became more radiant, just as the moon radiates a beautiful
sky with its stars.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Seetha was distressed to hear these words of Rama and spoke these words slowly, with
her face with tears.


"know all those disadvantages you mentioned about dwelling in the forest become
advantages to me, if your affection is placed before them."


"Oh Rama! Antelopes, lions, elephants, tigers, sarabhas(legendary animal with eight
legs), birds, yaks and all others which roam in the forest, run away after seeing your form, since
they have never seen your figure before. When there is cause for fear, who would not have
fear?"


"Oh, Rama! As per the command of the elders, I also should go along with you. My
life is to be abandoned here, if I were separated from you."


"Oh Rama! Even Devendra the Lord of celestials, by his strength, cannot over power
me, who is in your vicinity."


"Oh Rama! Verily such a thing was taught to me by you, that a woman disunited from
her husband should not be able to survive."


"Oh Rama, the very wise! Besides, formerly in my father's house it was heard by me
from the month of brahmanas that I was destined to stay really in a forest."


"Oh Rama the man of great strength! Ever since I heard this word from brahmanas who
can interpret marks on the body, I was always eager to stay in a forest."


"Oh, Rama the beloved! That prediction of dwelling in the forst is to be realised by
me. I must accordingly accompany you to the forest, it cannot be otherwise."


"I shall be the one who has fulfilled the brahmana's word. I shall accompany you to
the forest. The time has come for brahmana's words to come true."


"Oh valiant prince! I know that in the forest, sufferings indeed are many and are
invariably obtained by men having unformed minds."


"While I was an unmarried girl, the prediction about my dwelling the forest was
heard by me in my father's house from a female mendicant having good manners, in the presence of my
mother."


"Oh Lord! In the past, you have been really pleased for many a time to take me along
with you indeed for the tour of a forest, as longed by me."


"Oh, Rama! May all be well with you! I am waiting for a journey to the forest. A
work-out of adventurist is really delightful to me."


"Oh, the pure-minded! Following my husband with loving devotion, I shall become
sin-less; for husband is the supreme deity to me."


"Even after my death, I shall stay united with you. On this subject, the meritorious
words of brahmanas is being heard thus:- In this world, which woman was given away to whom by
parents with water according to the moral code binding on them, that woman belongs to him alone
even after death.


"By what reason now are you thus not willing to take me, the woman having good
conduct, devoted to her husband and belonging to you, from this place?"


"Oh Rama, the seion of Kakutsa! You ought to take me, who is a devotee, so devoted
to husband, who is distressed who feels alike in pleasure and pain and shares your joys and
sorrows."


"I shall take resort to poison or fire or water for dying, if you are not willing to
take me, afflicted as I am, as above."


Eventhough she requested him in many ways about setting out to the forest, he did
not agree to take her to the forest, which is a solitary place.


After hearing Rama's words, seetha was sorrowful, moistening with earth as it were
with burning tears, trickling down her eyes.


Rama the prudent man then pacified in many ways, to avert that Seetha with red lips,
who was sorrowful as above.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Rama along with Lakshmana, his younger brother, began to question Bharata, his
brother who was devoted to elders (as follows):


"I desire to hear from you, why you have come tot his place in robes of bark and an
antelope-skin."


"You ought to tell me all about the purpose for which you entered this place, clad
in deer-skin and matted hair, relinquishing the kingdom."


Thus questioned by the high souled Rama, by closely embracing him again, Bharata
with joined palms answered as follows:


"O, noble brother! Our father the mighty armed, after performing a deed must
difficult to perform, and having abandoned us has gone the divine region; he died of grief on
account of separation from his son."


"O, tormented of foes! As urged by his wife and my mother Kaikeyi;, our father
committed this great sin that has taken away his own reputation."


"Without having plucked the fruit of kingdom, widowed and emaciated with grief my
mother will fall into the most terrific hell."


"Grant me, who am your true servant, a favour! This very day, as Indra the Lord of
celestials himself, receive the royal anointing!"


"Grant all these people and these widowed Queens, who have come here to see you,
this felicity!"


"O, Prince! For that reason, accept the throne that is befitting; endowed to you as
per succession and that is yours by right fulfill, as your should, the desires of your
friends."


"Bring the widowhood of the entire world to an end by becoming her Lord, as does the
immaculate moon to the autumn-night."


"Grant this grace to your brother, who prostrates at your feet along with your
ministers is both your discipline and your slave."


"O, Tiger among men! You cannot disregard this unbroken kingdom, which is eternal,
ancestral and honoured."


Thus speaking, the mighty armed Bharata, with tears, once again seized Rama's feet
in great honour, as per precept.


Rama embraced his brother Bharata, who sighed again and again like an elephant in
rut, and spoke as follows:-


"How should a man of noble birth, rich in Sattva (goodness), dignified and who has
observed sacred vows like myself, commit sin for the sake of a mere kingdom?"


"O, Bharata the annihilator of enemies! I do not see the slightest fault in you and
you should not reproach your mother for a childish action."


"O, Bharata the highly intelligent and the faultless man! It is incumbent always on
the part of the elders to act freely with reference to their wives and progeny."


"O, gentle brother! Since it was said thus by virtuous men in this world, we should
all, women children and disciples, obey our Lord; this must be known to you."


"The great king is the master, who has a discretion either to make me reside in the
forest, wearing bark robes and a black antelope skin or to sit on the throne, O gentle
brother!"


"O, excellent among the supporters of law and the virtuous! The same degree of
respect is to be paid to our mother, as is due to our father, who is honoured by all."


"How can I do otherwise, while both my parents of virtuous nature ask me to go to
the forest?"


"It is for you to occupy the throne in Ayodhya that the world reveres and it is for
me to occupy this Dandaka forest, wearing bark robes."


"Having commanded thus, the emperor Dasaratha with a great splendour, made the
division of duties in this manner (for us two) in the presence of the people and then ascended to
heaven."


"That pious souled king, the preceptor of the world is the standard authority for
you and you have to enjoy the share given by our father accordingly."


"I, for my part, shall enjoy the share given to me by our high-souled father for
fourteen years, taking my abode in Dandaka forest, O gentle brother!"

undefined

undefined

undefined


Dasaratha was not suitable for such an unfortunate condition nor was he habituated
to such a situation. He was lying down on the floor, as king Yayati who fell down on earth fter
exhausting his merit in the region of heaven. Kaikeyi who was a manifestation of worthlessness who
accomplished her desire, who was fearlessly exhibiting her fearful form, asked for those boons
again in a loud voice, to Dasaratha who was in such a bad mood situation.


"Oh, king! You always boast yourself, saying "I speak truth. I am persisted in my
promise." Now, why are you objecting to my boon?"


After thus spoken to by Kaikeyi, Dasaratha became angry, turned out delirious for a
moment and again spoke as follows:


"Oh, the vulgar one! You, my enemy! You want to be happy after your desire is
fulfilled when Rama the best among men leaves for the forest and when I die thereafter. Alas!"


"When celestials ask for me about Rama's well-being after I reach heaven, how can I
indeed convince them that he is well obscuringly the actual fact?"


"If I tell without obscuring the fact that I sent Rama to exile desirous of showing
kindness to Kaikeyi, nobody will believe me."


"With much effort I, the childless begot the great and powerful Rama as my son. How
can I abandon such Rama?"


"How can I send away Rama who is valiant and knowledgeable, who has subdued anger,
who has forbearance and who has eyes like lotus-petals".


"How I can I send Rama, who is dark blue in colour like a blue lotus, who is
long-armed , who is very strong and graceful, to Dandaka forest?"


"Rama is accustomed to comforts. He is not accustomed to difficulties. How can I
imagine such sensible Rama in a troublesome situation?"


"Oh, cruel one! One with sinful thoughts! Oh, kaikeyi! why are you planning to do
harm to Rama who is beloved to me and who is truly heroic? I shall certainly get unequalled ill
fame and humiliation in this world".


While Dasaratha was thus lamenting with his disturbed mind, there was approach of
night with setting of the sun.


To Dasaratha, who was thus lamenting painfully, the night seemed to be dark even
though it was adorned with charming circular moon.


The aged Dasaratha was lamenting painfully as though afflicted with a disease, with
lot and hard breaths, having his eyes fixed on the sky.


"Oh, auspicious night, decorated with stars! do not wish you to do break into a
dawn. Have mercy on me. I pray with folded hands."


"Otherwise, Oh, Night! Leave away quickly. I do not went to see Kaikeyi, who is
shameless, cruel and for whose reason this great calamity occurred"


The king spoke like this and beseeched kaikeyi with folded hands. He again spoke
this word to Kaikeyi.


"Oh, auspicious queen! I am a well conducted man. I am dejected and seeking refuse
in you. I am an old man and especially a king. Be kind to me."


"Oh, well-hipped one! I hope that whatever I told, has not merged in the sky. Oh!
young woman, be kind to me . You are good-hearted."


"Oh, queen with dark outer corner of eyes be kind. You your self give my kingdom to
Rama. Thus, you will obtain great fame."


"Oh, broad hipped, with beautiful face and eyes! do this. It will be pleasing to me,
to Rama, to the world, to priests and to Bharata."


Hearing the king, who was her pure-hearted husband and who was pitifully lamenting
strangely with red eyes filled with tears, that bad tempered cruel woman did not follow his
words.


Seeing his discontented wife talking unpleasantly about sending Rama to forest, that
king was distressed, fainted again and fell down unconscious on the floor.


While the distressed and self-respected king was sighing terribly in the way, that
night came to an end. In the dawn, bards and singers started to awaken him. But the excellent king
prevented them to do.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Then, Kausalya, trembling again and again, as though possessed by a spirit, and
lying on the floor without proper disposition of mind, spoke to Sumantra as follows:


"Wherever Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana are there, take me to them. Without them, I do
not cherish to live here even for a moment."


"Turn back the chariot quickly. Take also myself to the forest of Dandaka. Now, if I
do not go after them, I shall enter the Death's abode."


Sumantra with joined palms and with a voice choked with tears and in faint accents,
consoling Kausalya, spoke these words to her.


"Abandon grief, delusion and haste born of affliction. Rama, can reside in the
forest, warding off anguish."


"Lakshmana too, knowing about a righteous conduct, having subdued his senses and
serving the feet of Rama in the forest, is propitiating the other world."


"Seetha, getting a dwelling place resembling a house even in a lonely forest, her
mind encamped in Rama and being fearless, is acquiring confidence.


"Not even very minute depression, even a little, is seen developed in Seetha. It
appears to me as though Seetha is accustomed to so many exiles."


"Seetha is taking delight in the desolate forests in the same manner as she was
earlier enjoying in visiting gardens in the city."


"Seetha, a charming woman with her face resembling a full moon and with her mind
absorbed in Rama, even though staying in a lonely forest, is enjoying it like a little girl."


"Seetha's heart is directed towards Rama. Her life also is dependent on him. Even if
Ayodhya is without Rama, then it becomes a forest to her."


"As if only a couple of miles away from Ayodhya and as being in a garden there,
Seetha on seeing villages, towns, movement of rivers, and various types of trees, enquires with
Rama or Lakshmana and Knows well about them."


"I am remembering only these incidents about Seetha. It does not flash to my mind
now of the words hurriedly spoken of by Seetha about Kaikeyi."


Expunging the remarks spoken by Seetha about Kaikeyi coming almost nearer to his
lips by inadvertence, Sumantra spoke only delightful and sweet words to Kausalya.


"Seetha's radiance resembling a moon's gleam is not fading away due to her travel in
the forest or due to the velocity of wind or because of her bewilderment or due to heat of the
sun."


"That face of altruistic Seetha resembling a lotus flower, whose lustre is similar
to that of a full moon, did not become changed."


"Her feet, which even though no longer painted with vermilion, still looks red as
Alakta (red juice obtained from resin of certain trees), with lustre equal to that of red lotus
buds."


"Seetha, sporting her tinkling anklets, walks playfully. Even now, Seetha dons her
ornaments, as a mark of Her passion towards Rama."


"Seetha who stays in the forest, takes refuge in the arms of Rama and hence does not
give Herself to fear, even by seeing an elephant or a lion or a tiger."


"There is no need to pity them nor us nor the king too. This story will thrive in
the world forever."


"Abandoning grief, possessing cheerful minds, settling well in the path followed by
great sages, delighting in the forest-life and eating fruits of the forest, they are keeping up the
promise given to their father."


Even if averted thus by Sumantra, who is speaking appropriately well, being
emaciated by sorrow for her son, could not stop crying, "O, my dear son Rama!"

undefined

undefined

undefined


Distressed with anguish (to see Rama and Sita lying on the ground) Guha said to
Lakshmana, the scion of Raghu, who kept awake, through sincere love, for the protection of his
brother Rama.


"Here is a comfortable bed made for you, my friend! Relax well comfortably on it,
Oh, prince!"


"All of us are habituated to hardships. You are habituated to comforts. We shall
keep awake this night, for the protection of Rama"


"For, none is dearer to me than Rama in this world. I speak the truth and swear to
you by truth."


"I hope to acquire abundant acclaim and supreme merit in this world as also full
reward of wealth, by the sole grace of Rama"


"As such, I along with my kindred, shall protect my dear friend Rama who is reposing
with Sita in every way, with bow in hand."


"Nothing is indeed unknown in this forest to me, where I wander continually. We can
able to withstand even a vast army too, comprising of four parts (elephants, chariots, cavalry, and
infantry)."


Then, Lakshmana replied to Guha as follows: "Oh, sinless Guha! Being protected by
you, who keep your duty alone in view, all of us are fearless in this land."


"When Rama, the son of Dasaratha is lying on the ground with Sita, how is it
possible for me to sleep or to enjoy the pleasures of life?"


"See that Rama, who cannot be vanquished in combat even by the gods and demons
combined, now sleeping profoundly on the grass along with Sita."


When Rama- who is endowed with similar characteristics as Dasaratha, uniquely
beloved, the son obtained by Dasaratha by virtue of his chanting of several sacred texts and
austerities and by various undertakings (in the form of sacrificial performances) has gone to
exile, the king will not live long and the earth will become surely widowed forthwith.


Having cried out in a high-pitched tone, the women having exhausted, will have
fallen silent and I am sure that a profound stillness reigns in the palace.


"I do not expect Kausalya, Dasaratha and my mother all of them to remain alive for
this night."


"By looking forward to meet Satrughna, my mother might even stay alive. But it will
be painful if Kausalya who has given birth to a heroic son, dies."


That city of Ayodhya, filled with devoted people, hitherto a source of joy and which
brought pleasure to the world, when seized with agony over the king's death, will perish.


"How, in the absence of his magnanimous and the first born son, will the vital airs
in the body of the generous king be maintained?"


"After the death of king, Kausalya will die. My mother also will die thereafter.


"Having failed to install Rama in the kingdom, failed forever, which was the most
cherished wish of his heart, my father will leave this world.


"Those who are fortunate will consecrate our deceased father and the king in the
course of all funeral rites, when the hour has struck.


People will joyfully move in the capital belonging to my father and the city with
its quadrangular places allocated at lovely sites, and well- aligned roads, rich in mansions of
well-to-do men, temples and royal palaces adorned with the foremost of courtesans, its chariots
horses and elephants that obstruct the roads, the musical instruments that resound there- full of
all blessings and crowded with merry and well fed men, well- provided with gardens and royal parks
and bright with festivities carried on under the patronage of associations.


Will Dasaratha remain alive? After returning from exile, can we see the high-soled
king Dasaratha of noble vows again?


Can we safely return to Ayodhya, after completion of the exile in the forest along
with Rama who is faithful to his promises?


While the high-soled Lakshmana thus lamenting, stood on ground, afflicted with
anguish as he was, that night rolled away.


While Lakshmana (son of Dasaratha), who was concerned with the welfare of the
people; was thus speaking the truth out of his affection for his elder brother (Rama), Guha,
overcome with agony and oppressed with adversity shed tears like an elephant tormented with
fever.

undefined

undefined

undefined


When harsh words with anger in this manner by the grief-stricken Kausalya, Rama's
mother were heard, king Dasaratha felt depressed and reflected upon them.


The king fell brooding thus perplexed as he was in his mind and lost his
consciousness. Thereafter, that king who torments the enemies regained his consciousness after a
long time.


After restoring his consciousness he, breathing a long and hot sigh and seeing
Kausalya by his side, began to worry again.


As he thus brooded over, he recalled in his mind, a sinful deed that was done by him
out of ignorance long ago, by shooting with an arrow an unseen object, the sound of which was only
heard.


The mighty emperor felt distressed through agony caused by that sinful dead and as
also through agony caused by separation from Rama and was tormented by the dual grief.


That king, tormented by the afflictions, was trembling, bent his head down, joined
his palms in salutation, desirous of getting her grace and spoke to Kausalya as follows:


"O, Kausalya! I seek your grace. This joining of palms is set out by me. You are
always affectionate even towards others and even indeed kind."


"O, queen! For women reflecting on righteousness, a husband whether he is virtuous
or worthless, is a visible god indeed."


"You as such, who is ever intent on virtue, who has understood good and evil
fortunes in the world, even if grief-stricken, ought not to have spoken unpleasant words to me, who
is too much in distress."


Hearing those miserable words spoken by the distressed king, Kausalya shed tears,
akin to new rain water flowing from channel.


Capturing on her own head, the king's palms joined in the form of a lotus, Kausalya
was scared and spoke weeping in hurriedly lettered words in eagerness.


"O, king! I appeal to you with my bowed head. I lie prostrate on the floor. I am
ruined. I am not to be forgiven indeed by you."


"O, Valiant man! In both the worlds, it is ill-becoming of a woman, being
propitiated by her husband, who is praise worthy and possessing good disposition."


"O, valiant man! In both the worlds, it of a woman, being propitiated by her
husband, who is praise worthy and possessing good disposition."


"Grief ruins courage. Grief ruins sacred learning, grief ruins all. There is no
enemy like grief."


"A hitting that descended from the hands of an enemy is possible to be tolerated.
But, the grief suddenly descended, even if so small, is not possible to be tolerated."


"O, valiant man! Even ascetics, who know righteousness, who have learnt sacred texts
and who have rent asunder doubts relating to religious merit and wealth, go astray having their
minds infatuated with grief."


"Today it is counted as five days since Rama has gone to exile. It is equal to five
years for me, since grief has ruined my happiness."


"While I think of Rama, this grief in my heart is increasing, like water in a great
ocean increases with the fast streaming of rivers.


While Kausalya was telling auspicious words indeed as aforesaid the sun became
feeble and turned towards night too.


The king, thus cheered up by the queen Kausalya, got subjected to slumber, after
having been overcome by grief.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, early in the morning on the fourteenth day, the king-makers coming
together, spoke to Bharata the following words.


"Dasaratha, who was our highly venerable master, went to heaven after sending his
elder son Rama and the exceedingly strong Lakshmana to forest."


"O, the highly illustrious prince! From now on, do you be our king. Fortunately,
this kingdom has not yet missed the mark, even without a king."


"O, prince Bharata! Taking all the things needed for coronation, your own people
(the counsellers and the ministers) as well as the citizens are awaiting for you."


"O, Bharata the excellent among men! Take over the stable kingdom, which came in
succession from your ancestors, coronate yourself and rule us."


The firmly resolute Bharata performed circumambulation clockwise around all the
things kept ready for consecration and replied to all those people as follows:


"It is indeed appropriate to bestow kingship always to the eldest of our clan. You,
being the conversant people, ought not to tell in this manner to me."


"Our eldest brother, Rama will become the king. I then will reside in the forest for
fourteen years."


"Let a great and exceptionally powerful army consisting of all the four limbs be
kept ready. I shall bring Rama our elder brother from the forest."


"Keeping in front, all the assembled requisites needed for consecration, I shall
proceed to the forest for the sake of bringing back Rama."


"Consecrating him, the tiger among men there itself, I shall surely bring Rama
solemnized in front, as bringing home the sacred fire from a sacrificial rite, after performing it
outside the city."


"I shall not make her, my so-called mother, fulfil her desire. I will reside in the
impassable forest. Rama will become the king."


"Let a path-way be prepared by those skilled in that profession, by leveling the
uneven surfaces. Let guards who can easily move in the inaccessible forests accompany us in the
path."


Hearing Prince Bharata, talking in consideration of Rama's cause, all the people
replied in the following illustrious and excellent words:


"Let the gracious goddess of prosperity abide with you, who are speaking thus,
desirous of giving kingdom to Rama the eldest son of the king."


Hearing those excellent words spoken by the prince close to their ears, tears born
of joy fell from the face and eyes of those venerable men.


Hearing these words, the people there along with council and the ministers felt
cheerful, being relieved of their anxiety and spoke the following words : "As per your command,
devoted men and a group of artisans have been instructed to make the path-way."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Then Guha the foremost dweller reported Bharata, who was having incomprehensible
qualities, about the quality of goodness of Lakshmana(as follows):


"I spoke as follows to that Lakshmana, who is endowed with virtues and wielding
arrows bow and a sword and who was keeping a vigil for the safe guard of his brother."


"O, dear brother! Here is a comfortable bed made ready for you. Feel yourself at
ease. Rest peacefully on this, O, delight of the Raghu race!"


"All my people are habituated for hardships, o virtuous prince! You are used to
comfort. Hence ,we shall keep awake for the safe guard of Rama."


"None is more dear to me than Rama on this earth. Moreover, do not become restless.
I am telling this truth in your presence."


"By the grace of Rama, I wish to attain a very great renown in this earth, an
extensive acquisition of righteousness, an unalloyed wealth and enjoyment."


"I as such with a bow in my hand, along with my relatives will guard my dear friend
Rama, who slept together with Seetha."


"Nothing is indeed unknown to me, who forever wander in this forest. We can defeat
even an army consisting of all the four limbs in battle."


"Thus spoken as aforesaid by us the high soled Lakshmana, who perceives
righteousness alone,politely replied to all of us( as follows)


"How is it possible for me to get a sleep, or even life or comforts when Rama is
reposing on the floor along with Seetha?"


"O, Guha! Behold that Rama, who cannot be conquered in a battle even by all the
celestials and demons, sleeping on the blades of grass along with Seetha."


"This Rama is an excellent son, having qualities equal to those of Dasaratha. The
king obtained Rama by performing a great penance and after facing various troubles."


"When Rama having seen exiled, the king Dasaratha will not survive for long.This
earth will surely be without a husband soon."


"The women in the gynoecium's, having cried with a great noise, would have ceased
their crying out of fatigue. Now, the great noise would have stopped in the royal palace by
now."


"I do not expect whether all of them, like Kausalya Dasaratha and even my mother
Sumitra will survive at all till this night."


"By beholding Shatrughna, my mother perhaps may even survive. However, the afflicted
Kausalya who gave birth to the eminent Rama will surely die."


Without realising his long-cherished wish and failing to install Rama in the kingdom
of Aodhya, my father Dasaratha will expire."


"Those who have accomplished their purpose (Shatrughna and others) will perform all
the funeal honours to king Dasaratha, my father when the time comes for it."


"They will joyfully inhabit my father capital City, with its pleasant cross roads
and meeting places, with its main roads well laid out, sumptuous with large houses and lofty
mansions, with all the gems they are encrusted, with elephants horses and chariots that abound
there, the sound of trumpets with which the city resonates, the many diversions it contains, its
properous and well-fed people, its luxurious gardens and parks as well as the assmeblies and
festivals that continuously take place inti."


Shall we enter Ayodhya happily along with that virtuous Rama, who has truly redeemed
his promise, when he completed his term of exile?


While that magnamimous prince was lamenting thus, standing guard, the night
passed.


"When the sun rose brightly in the next morning Rama and Lakshmana got their locks
of hair matted into a thick mass at the banks of River Ganga and they were safely ferried by
me."


"Rama and Lakshmana, who were capable of tormenting their enemies, possessing great
strength, wearing matted locks of hari and clothes made of bark, like unto the leaders of herd of
elephants, wielding excellent bow, arrows and sword, looking back at me, went away with Seetha.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Then, those able to advise on the nature of soils, those skilled in thread-holding
for leveling purposes, those who were energetic courageous and attentive in doing their jobs,
excavators, mechanics, labourers, carpenters, road-menders, wood-cutters, hollow-makers, men
skilled in plastering and white washing, basket makers, tanners and skilled supervisors of work
sallied forth in advance.


That mighty assembly of men gladly setting out to that forest was splendid like an
ocean on the day of the full moon having a gigantic commotion.


Men skilled in making roads, furnished with tools of every kin, seeking the company
of men of their own proper place, marched ahead.


Clearing away rows of creepers and shrubs timber and big rocks as well as variours
kinds of trees (which obstructed the way), they carved out a path.


Some men planted trees in tree-less areas. Some others chopped the existing trees
here and there by means of axes, hatchets and sickles.


Some other strong men removed sturdy tufts of Virana grass and leveled the uneven
places here and there.


Some others filled up wells and extensive pits with earth. Some men leveled
low-lying places all around.


Then, some men bridged the steams that could be bridged, pulverised the rocks that
could be pulverised and smashed (the impediments that blocked the flow of water) those which could
be smashed.


Many ponds, in various sizes and shapes containing plenty of water resembling seas
were built (by constructing dams on rivulets).


In water-scarce areas, excellent wells in various shapes were dug duly decorated all
around with platforms (to rest).


That track of the troops, having its surface inlaid with cement, with flowering
trees inlaid with cement, with flowering trees on both sides, inhabited with birds in excitement
making their sounds, adorned with flags on its either side with its surface sprinkled with water of
sandal-wood fragrance, and decorated with various kinds of flowers, looked very much splendid like
the path of celestials.


Those officers appointed for execution of the work, as ordered by Bharata,
skillfully instructed their work-men and erected a tent which was intended for the great-souled
Bharata, in a beautiful place abundant with tasty fruits. They further adorned profusely with
decorations, the tent which itself resembled on ornament.


The connoisseurs erected the tents of the high-souled Bharata at auspicious hours in
days when the stars were propitious.


Those camps, with many breast works of sand, moats surrounding each of them, streets
as resplendent as sapphires, their crowns of terrets, the ramparts covered with stucco to protect
then, the splendid banners, the skillfully laidout avenues, lofty mansions the tops of which were
provided with dove-cots, which flew about as it were in the air and in splendour, resembled the
capitals of Indra.


The route thus prepared, extended upto the Ganga River, whose pure and limpid
waters, abounding in great fish, flowed between woods and forests of every kind.


That beautiful royal high way, which was built gradually by efficient engineers,
appeared as resplendent as a night in a clear sky, illumined by the moon with its procession of
stars.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Sita, who speaks kindly and deserves kind utterances, after hearing Rama's words,
became angry out of love alone and spoke thus to her husband.


Oh, Rama the prince! What words these are you speaking? These light words certainly
are to be laughed at by you and to me after hearning.


"Oh, noble prince! Father, mother, brother, son and daughter-in-law accomplish their
own good fortune, as benefitted by their own pious deeds."


"Oh, Rama the best of men! Wife for one gets fortune of the husband. For that
reason, I am also destined to dwell in the forest."


" To a woman, father or son or self or mother or female companion are not the
recourse. Husband alone is forever the best recourse either in this world or after her death".


"Oh, Rama! If you set forth now itself to the forest, which is difficult to be
travelled, I shall come before you, by trampling down thorns and grass with long pointed
stalks."


"Oh, brave man! By abandoning, as water left over after drinking, the impatience and
anger and having faith, take me. There is no sin in me."


"Protection under the feet of the husband is better than being on top of a lofty
building or in aerial cars or in moving through the sky or in attaining all types of
positions."


"My mother and father taught me of different matters long ago. I need not be told
now, how to deal in any way with anyone."


" I can come to forest which is inaccessible, which is devoid of people, filled with
various types of animals and inhaited by tigers and jackals."


"Not thinking of three world, thinking of loyalty to husband, I shall dwell in the
forest happily as though staying in our father's house".


"Oh, brave man! performing service to you regularly, having the necessary
discipline, observing chastity, I would like to stay with you in the forests which smell like
honey."


"Oh, Rama, the bestower of honour! Here in the forest, you are indeed capable of
protecting other people also. Why to tell about my protection?"


"Today no doubt, I will come to forest along with you. Oh, the illustrious! I, with
this intention, cannot be prevented to do so."


I shall live only on roots and fruits always, no doubt. Living along with you, I
shall not create any unpleasantness to you.


" With you the learned and the lord, I shall not have fear anywhere. I wish to see
rivers, mountains, small lakes and grooves."


I shall be comfortable, by coming together with you, the courageous man. I desire to
see lotus- ponds filled with swans, water-fowls and excellently flowered.


"Oh, the large eyed lord! Remaining dedicated to you, I shall take bath regularly in
those lakes and with full of joy, I shall sport with you."


Thus spending even a hundred thousand years in your company I shall never find any
deviation/ Heaven also will not be acceptable to me otherwise.


Oh, Lion among men and seion of Raghu! Even if in heaven there is residence for me
without you, I do not like it.


I shall proceed to the forest, which is very much inaccessible and occupied by
monkeys, elephants as well as other animals. Clining to your feet alone, I shall dwell in the
forest as though in father's home.


"Therefore, grant well my prayer and usher me- me without any other thought, whose
mind is fondly attached to you and who am determined to die if separated from you. Due to this,
there will be no burden to you from me."


sita along with him eventhought she was speaking as a foresaid. To hold her back
from coming to forest, he also started talking highly of the various afflictions she might have to
face in a forest.

undefined

undefined

undefined

Bharata thanks Guha for having come forward to offer hospitality to him and his 
		army. He enquires about the proper route to proceed to the hermitage of Bharadvaja. Guha assures 
		Bharata that he along with some of his ferrymen will follow him as guides. When Guha enquires 
		Bharata whether he has an evil intention towards Rama, Bharata clarifies him that he is proceeding 
		to Rama?s place to bring him back to Ayodhya. When night falls Bharata along with Shatrughna 
		and his army take rest. However Guha consoles Bharata, who has been constantly bewailing, till 
		the nightfall.

Hearing those words, the highly intelligent Bharata replied toGuha, the lord of Nishadas, 
in words that were full of reason and meaning.

?O, friend of my elder brother! Indeed, your desire to offerhospitality to my army of 
such a magnitude, is great.?

Having spoken these excellent words to Guha; the greatlyillustrious Bharata, possessed 
of great splendor, said again to Guha the kingof Nishadas (as follows):

?O, Guha! By which of these two routes can I go to the hermitageof Bharadvaja? This region 
engulfed in waters of Ganga River is not very much easy to negotiate and is difficult to cross.?

Hearing the words of the wise prince; Guha, who roams about inwoods, with joined palms 
answered as follows:

?O highly illustrious prince! My ferrymen wielding their bows,and very attentive, will 
certainly accompany you. I too will follow you (inperson).?

?I hope you are not going to attack Rama, who is unwearied inaction. This great army 
of yours is begetting an apprehension in my mind.?

Bharata, whose heart resembled a taintless sky, spoke thefollowing words in smooth voice, 
to that Guha, who confessed his doubt asaforesaid.

?Let not such an occasion of wretchedness come! You should neverhave suspected me. That 
Rama my elder brother is indeed regarded as my father.?

?I am going to get back Rama who is now living in the forest. O,Guha! No other apprehension 
should be made by you. I am telling you the truth.?

Hearing the words of Bharata, Guha on his part, with his faceradiated with joy spoke 
again to Bharata as follows:

?You be blessed! I do not see your equal on this earth - you, whowish to renounce the 
empire you acquired now, even without effort.?

Assuredly your fame will traverse permanently in all provinces,as you are the very person 
who wishes to bring back Rama from his terribleplight.

While Guha was talking thus to Bharata, the sun diffused lesslight and the night fell.

The illustrious Bharata, lodging that army in camps, feltdelighted by Guha?s hospitality, 
returned to his camp and took rest along withShatrughna.

The high soled Bharata, whose only aim is to fulfill his duty andwho is undeserving of 
sorrow, indeed felt grief, born of anguish for Rama.

As a fire is hidden in a hollow tree while a forest is on fire, sodid Bharata?s fire 
of anguish burn with in his heart.

Perspiration born of fieriness of grief poured off from all hislimbs, as the snow heated 
by solar rays melts and flows from Himavat mountain.

Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi was pressed by the weight of thatcolossal mountain of agony 
consisting of rocky caverns in the shape of settledcontemplations on Rama, minerals in the shape of 
groans and sighs, a cluster oftrees in the shape of depressive thoughts, summits in the form of sufferingsand 
fatigue, countless wild beasts in the shape of swoons, herbs and bamboos inthe form of his exertions.

Thereafter, Bharata the excellent among men sighing much inmelancholy, his mind utterly 
confused in consequence, having obtained anextreme distress, afflicted as he was with burning fever 
in his breast and likea bull strayed from its herd, found no peace.

The noble soled Bharata, with his escort, met Guha too in acomposed mind. Then Guha slowly 
reassured Bharata again as regards his elderbrother.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thinking of difficulties one will be called upon to bear in the forest, Rama who was
fond of righteousness did not form the idea of taking Sita who was speaking as aforesaid.


Soothening with kind words to Sita, when eyes were blemished with tears, the
virtuous Rama spoke again as follows, for the purpose of waking her turn back.


"Sita! Your are born in a high lineage, ever devoted to righteousness. Perform your
own virtue here, which is agreable to my mind."


"Oh Sita, the delicate! Do whatever I tell you. There are many inconveniencs in the
forest. Know them from me."


"Oh, Sita! Let your thought made about forest be given up. It is indeed said that
forest with its wilderness is fraught with many dangers."


This advice is given by me, keeping your welfare in view. I do not ever consider a
forest as comfortable. It is always uncomfortable."


"The sounds created from waterfalls in hills and from lions resding in mountain
caves are unpleasant to hear. That is why living in a forest in uncomfortable."


"Large wild animals which are fearless and intoxicated sporting in the desolate
forest; come forward, after seeing. Oh, Sita! That is why living in forest is uncomfortable."


"Even streams filled with crocodiles full of mire are difficult to be crossed by rut
elephants also. Hence dwelling in a forest is always very much uncomfortable.


"Pathways covered with creepers and thorns, echoed with noise of wild cocks, are
water-less and very difficult to enter. Hence dwelling in a forest is hardship."


"One distress by fatigue has to sleep in nights on a bed of fallen leaves. Hence,
living in a forest is very much a misery."


"Oh, Sita! With mind disciplined day and night, one has to necessarily satisfy
ourself with fruits fallen from trees. Hence, living in a forest is a suffering."


"Oh, Sita the princess of Mithila! Fasting is to be done according to one's stamina.
Clothes of bark are to be worn and mass of matted hair has to be worn on the head."


"The celestials, the ancestors, the guests who arrive are to be worshipped always
according to the preseribed rites."


"Bath is to be performed three times a day at appropriate time by the one moving in
the forest, with one's mind kept in restraint. Hence, living in a forest is very much a
misery."


"Oh, Sita the innocent! Offering is to be done with flowers brought by one's own
self at the altar, according to the rites prescribed by sages. Hence, living in a forest is a
hardship."


"Oh, Sita the princess of Mithila! The dwellers of forest are to be satisfied with
whatever is obtained there, the restricted food. Hence, living in forest is a misery.


"In the forest, air and darkness are too much. There are always hunger and great
fears too. Hence, dwelling in a forest is very much a misery."


"Oh, Sita! Various creeping animals of different forms roam about on earth with
pride. Hence dwelling in a forst is a great misery."


"Snakes dwelling in rivers, moving crookedly like rivers, stay obstucting the
pathways. Hence, living in forest is a great misery."


"Oh, frail princess! Flying insects, scropious, insects including mosquitoes and
files always annoy every one. Hence, forest is full of hardship."


"Oh, Sita! Forest is full of trees, kusa grass and bambooes with ends of their
branches spread on all sides. Hence, living in a forest is a great misery."


"An inhabitant living in a forest has to face various bodily troubles and panics.
Hence, forest- life is readly a misery."


"Anger and greed are to be abandoned by the dwellers of forest. Devotion is to be
bestowed on asceticism. What needs to be feared, should not be feared. Hence, living in a forest is
a suffereing."


"Therefore, do away with the idea of your coming to the forest. Forest is not indeed
bearable for you. Reflecting now, I perceive forest as having too many disadvantages."


As the great souled Rama did not agree to take her to the forest, the much aggrieved
Sita spoke to Rama as follows:-

undefined

undefined

undefined


Hearing those most disagreeable words from Guha, Bharata began to think deeply,
directing his mind on Rama, of whom those unpleasant words were heard.


That gentle, extremely courageous and the mighty armed young prince, whose shoulders
resembled a lion's his large eyes opening like a flowering lotus and having pleasing appearance,
momentarily sighed and in his extreme anguish, sank to the ground suddenly like an elephant that
has been wounded in the heart with goads.


Seeing Bharata unconscious, Guha growing pale, shook like a tree during an
earthquake.


Shatrughna, who stood near, taking Bharata, who was in that unconscious state in his
arms, becoming non-pulsed, cried loudly, overcome as he was with grief.


Then, all the queens, emaciated through fasting, extremely miserable, being unable
to find consolation for the sad end of their lord, rushed towards Bharata.


All of them, sobbing, surrounded Bharata who fell on the ground. Kausalya on her
part, torn with grief and bending over him, embraced him.


That affectionate Kausalya, agitated as she was with grief and looking miserable,
pressing him to her bosom as a cow its own calf, questioned Bharata (in the following words)


"O, son! I hope that no ailment afflicts your body. Now, the life of this royal race
is indeed dependent on you."


"O, son! Rama along with Lakshman has gone to the forest. The king Dasaratha is
dead. I survive, looking on you. Now, you alone are the protector for us."


"I hope you have not heard any unpleasant news about Lakshmana or about Rama my one
and the only son who left for the forest along with his wife."


Bharata of great renown, easing himself well within a moment, consoled Kausalya and
while still weeping, spoke to Guha (as follows)


"O, guha! Tell me where did Rama my brother as also Seetha and Lakshmana halt in the
night? On what couch and eating what, did he repose?


Guha, the Lord of Nishadas, thrilling with rapture, spoke to Bharata about the
manner in which he made arrangements for (feeding and reposing) his beloved and kind guest,
Rama.


"Various kinds of food and drink and different varieties of fruits were brought
repeatedly by me to the presence of Rama for the purpose of his consumption."


Rama, the truly courageous man, refused all of them. Reminding himself of his
warrior's statute, he could not accept it.


"O, Bharata! We were pacified by that high-souled Rama by saying thus: ' O, friend!
We are not allowed to receive anything we must always be givers."


"Rama, of great glory, then along with Seetha drank the water brought by Lakshman as
observed fasting."


"Thereafter Lakshmana also drank the left-over water and those three practised
silence together in that evening-twilight.


"Lakshmana then personally brought a layer of Kusa grass and arranged a fittingly
nice bed with it for Rama immediately."


"Rama, along with Seetha, settled down on that bed. After washing their feet,
Lakshmana went away to a distance."


"Here at this fort of Ingndi Tree, on just this grass, on which both Rama and Seetha
slept that night."


"Lakshmana, the scourge of his foe, wearing a glove of goha skin, strapping two
quivers full of arrows on either side of his back and wielding a great stringed bow, remained on
his part walking round Rama during that night."


"Wearing excellent arrows and a bow along with my vigilant kinsmen carrying their
bows, I on my part remained near Lakshman, who was guarding Rama who vied with Indra the Lord of
celestials."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having seen Bharadwaja's hermitage at a couple of miles away, that excellent man
Bharata, knowing what is right, leaving all his army behind, discarding his weapons and ornaments,
and wearing simple silken garment, went forwards by foot, proceeded by Vasishta, his spiritual
preceptor.


Leaving his ministers behind at a visible distance to Bharadwaja, Bharata then went
along with Vasishta, his spiritual preceptor.


On seeing Vasishta, Bharadwaja the great ascetic rose quickly from his seat, asking
his disciples to fetch water to wash the hand (of the distinguished guests) with.


Having met Vasishta and greeted by Bharata, Bharadwaja of great splendour recognized
him to be a son of Dasaratha.


Bharadwaja, knowing what is right, offering them both, in order of seniority, water
to wash theri hands and feet with and fruits afterwards, made enquiries concerning the welfare of
their family.


Subsequently, Bharadwaja made enquires with both of them as to whether all were well
in the city of Ayodhya, with the army, with the treasury, friends and counsellors. But knowing
Dasaratha friends and counsellors. But knowing Dasaratha to be dead, he did not speak of the
king.


Vasishta and Bharata in return made enquires with Bharadwaja, if all were well with
his body his sacred fires, his disciples, the trees, the deer and birds in the hermitage.


The great ascetic Bharadwaja replied, "All is well" and spoke the following words to
Bharata, bound as he was with affection to Rama.


"For what reason have you, who are ruling the kingdom, come here? Tell me all this,
for my mind is not getting cleared of doubts."


"That annihilator of enemies, born of Kausalya for the increase of her happiness, he
who with his brother and his wife have been exiled to the forest for a long period, that Rama who
is full of glory, through the intrigues of a woman was condemned to dwell in the forest for
fourteen years by his father. I hope you do not intend to do any harm to that irreproachable prince
and his younger brother in order to enjoy the throne without hindrance."


"Thus spoken to as aforesaid, Bharata with his eyes filled with tears in grief and
in a faltering tone, replied to Bharadwaja as follows:


"If you the Blessed One, regard me like this, I am lost indeed! I cannot conceive of
any harm towards Rama having proceeded from me. do not charge me thus."


" I do not approve of what my mother has done when I was away from home. I am not
pleased with her nor do I accept her word in this matter."


"I, on my part, came to take back that tiger among men to Ayodhya, after prostrating
myself at his feet and having propitiated him."


"O, venerable one! Believing me to have come for the aforesaid purpose, you ought to
do a favour for me. Tell me where Rama the Lord of the world is to be found now?"


Requested by Vasishta and other priests likewise, Bharadwaja answered Bharata in
affectionate words as follows:


"O, Bharata the tiger among men! Good manners towards teachers as well as self
control and walking in the footsteps of virtuous men-these qualities are worthy of you, born as you
are in the Raghu dynasty."


" I was aware of your purpose in your mind. But, I desired to confirm it and it is
on this account that I asked you, in order to strengthen you fame immeasurably."


"I know where the virtuous Rama along with Seetha and LakSmana are to be found. Your
elder brother is staying on the great mountain called Chitrakuta."


"You may proceed to that place tomorrow. Stay here today along with your ministers.
O, man of great wisdom, who understands legitimate interest and desire! Grant me this desire."


Bharata of a broad outlook and whose reality (as an admirer of Rama) had now come to
be known, answered thus: "So be it". Then, the prince made up his mind to stay for that night in
the hermitage."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, Shatrughna the younger brother of Lakshmana spoke the following words to
Bharata, who was tormented with grief and who desired to undertake an expedition to Rama.


"When that even-minded Rama is a refuge for all beings, how much more to tell about
our seeking solace to him in our grief? He has been abandoned to the forest by a woman."


"Why the so-called Lakshmana, the strong and powerful man, even could not rescue
Rama from distress by making our father to restrain from doing it?"


"By perceiving the prudence and imprudence in that wrong course adopted by the king,
who has fallen into the clutches of a woman, Lakshmana should have restrained Dasaratha even at the
beginning itself."


While Shatrughna the younger brother of Lakshmana was talking thus, the hump-backed
Manthara duly adorned with all types of ornaments, appeared at the eastern gate.


Anointed with a scent of sandal-wood and wearing royal clothes, she was bedecked
with several kinds of ornaments of every description in various ways.


Studded with bright-coloured girdle-bands and many other excellent ornaments,
Manthara appeared like a female-monkey tied with ropes!


Beholding that hump-backed Manthara, the very much sinful and insensitive woman, the
door-keepers caught her and delivered her to Shatrughna (with the following words:)


"Here is that sinful and cruel woman, by whose act Rama is in the forest and your
father has laid down his body. Do with her, as you consider fitting."


Hearing those words, Shatrughna who was very much in grief and was firmly resolute,
spoke to all those inmates of that gynaecium, as follows:


"Let this woman, who created serious misfortune to my brothers and my father,
receive the fruit of her cruel act."


Speaking thus in the midst of her companions, he seized that hunch-backed woman with
his powerful hand soon and she in turn made that mansion resound with her shrieks.


Then, her companion, having conceived Shatrughna's anger and extremely agonised as
they were, ran away helter-shelter in all directions.


All the company of women there surmised as follows : "The way how he is coming up,
he will surely slay us all"


"We shall take reguge with the compassionate, magnanimous, virtuous and illustrious
Kausalya. Let her be the sure asylum for us."


That Shatrughna, the tormentor of enemies, with his raging red eyes then violently
dragged the crying hump-back along the floor.


While that Manthara was violently dragged, here various colourful ornaments were
scattered asunder here and there on the floor.


Thus, that splendid royal mansion scattered by those ornaments, appeared very much
like an autumnal sky studded with innumerable stars.


Shatrughna, the strong and the eminent man, thus violently seizing her with rage,
sharply rebuked Kaikeyi and spoke harsh words to her.


Agonised very much by those harsh and painful words, Kiakeyi overwhelmed as she was
with the fear of Shatrughna, took refuge with Bharata.


Seeing that enraged Shatrughna, Bharata said: "Among all beings women are not to be
killed. Hence she is to be pardoned."


"If the pious Rama were not to express his displeasure with me for killing the
mother, I would have killed this Kaikeyi, the ill-mannered and sinful woman."


"If the virtuous Rama hears that the hunch-backed woman has been killed, it is sure
that he will cease to talk to you or even to me."


Hearing the words of Bharata, Shatrughna the younger brother of Lakshmana renouncing
his guilty design forthwith released that Manthara.


Manthara fell at the feet of Kaikeyi, breathless, weeping piteously.


Seeing the hunch-backed woman, who was distraught on account of shatrughna's
violence, wearing a disturbed appearance and looking like a crane that has been caught in a noose,
Bharata's mother slowly consoled her.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Bharata, born in Raghu race, having passed the night in that place on the banks of
Ganga, rising at dawn, said to shatrughna as follows:


"O, Shatrughna! wake up! Why sleep longer/ Bring guha the king of Nishadhas quickly
and be happy. Let him convey the army across the river."


Thus urged by Bhrata, his brother Shatrughna said, "I am not sleeping. Thinking of
that Rama alone, I have been wakeful."


While those two lions among men were talking themselves with each other thus, Guha
came in time and with joined palms, addressed Bharata saying:


"O, Bhrata! Did you pass the night happily on the banks of the river? I hope all is
well with your army."


Hearing those words of Guha spoken with affection, Bharata also in his devotion to
Rama, replied as follows:


"O, king! The night passed leasantly fo r us. We were treated hospitably by you. Let
your fisher-men ferry us across Ganga River on your courtless boats."


Hearing Bharata's command, Guha returned to the city in all haste and spoke to those
multitude of his people (as follows):


"Rise, awake and may prosperity ever attend you! Duly haul the boats to the bank.
Let us carry the army across the river."


Rising immediately on hearing the command of their king, they quickly brought
together five hundred boats from every quarter.


Some excellent boats, possessing large bells were marked with Sawstika, well-kept
together with appropriate sails and adorned with flags.


Then, Guha brought there one boat also adorned with Swastika, was covered with white
canvas, re-echoing with acclamations and which was beautiful.


Vasishta, the royal priest and whatever elderly Brahmanas were present there
ascended the boats, even before Bharata, Shatrughna, Kausalya, Sumitra. Whatever royal women were
present also took theri seats. Thereafter followed the king's wives a well as bullock- carts and
provisions.


The sound of men setting fire to the huts, of those who were descending the steps
leading to the boat and those who were transporting their effects touched the sky.


Thos boats, adorned with flags, steered by fisher-men themselves ran speedily, duly
carrying those passengers.


Some were filled with women. Some were loaded with horses and some of them ferried
animals of draught of great value.


Having reached the opposite shore, thsoe boats cleared those people and on the
return journey, the kinsfolk of guha plied them as easily as toy- boats made of bamboo.


Goaded on by their mahouts, elephants adorned with their flags, swimming across the
river, looked life winged mountains.


Some ascended boats. Some others crossed the river by rafts in the same manner. Some
others swam across with the help of big and small earthen vessels. The rest swam with arms.


Having made to cross River Ganga by the fisher-men themselves, that holy army
reached the magnificient woods of Prayaga at the hour of Maitra.


The high-souled Bharata made the army to rest, by encamping it according to its
inclination and set out along with the priests and king's counsellors to meet Bharadwaja, the
foremost of sages.


Approaching the hermitage of that high-souled Brahmana and the family priest of
gods, Bharata saw an extensive and enchanting grove with its leafy huts and tress the chief of
ascatics.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Hearing their words, Vasistha replied thus to that group of friends as well as
ministers and to all the Brahmans (assembled there):


"Bharata, who was given kingdom (by Dasaratha) is staying very happily in his
maternal uncle's home, along with Satrughna. Hence messengers in fast running horses are to be sent
quickly to bring back those heroic brothers. What are we to think of further in this matter?"


Then all of them uttered words agreeing to send the messengers quickly. Hearing
their words, Vasistha spoke as follows:


"O, Siddhartha! O, Jay anta! O, Vijaya! O, Ashoka! O, Nandana! Please come. I am
telling you all. Hear that which is to be done"


"After starting quickly from here by traveling in rapidly running horses, you reach
the city of Rajagriha. After relieving yourself of the grief, you have to tell Bharata these words
as my orders:"


"The royal priest and other ministers are asking about your welfare. Come forth, by
starting quickly. There is a very urgent work with you."


"After going there, do not tell him that Rama has gone to exile or that his father
is dead or about this calamity occurred to the descendents of Raghu dynasty."


"Go quickly, taking silk clothes and excellent ornaments to the king and to Bharata
"


The messengers, who are going to leave for the land of Kekayas, took sufficient
eatables required on their way and went to their respective houses, by riding on their admirable
horses.


Having completed all the remaining preparations for the journey and having been
permitted by Vasistha, the messengers quickly proceeded (to the destination).


Those messengers went on touching Malini River, flowing between the passing
Aparatala Mountain and the northern end of Pralamba Mountain.


Having crossed Ganga River at Hastinapura, they proceeded towards west and, reaching
Panchala kingdom through Kuru Jangala and observing well filled lakes and rivers with clear water,
the aforesaid messengers went briskly, due to the pressing nature of their mission.


They speedily moved on, crossing the beautiful Saradanda River, containing clear
water frequented by various kinds of birds.


Reaching a holy coastal tree called Satyopayaachana (so called because prayers made
to it become fulfilled); which was worthy of salutation and going round it clockwise (as a mark of
respect) the messengers entered the city of Kulinga


From there having reached a village named Abhikala, they crossed the holy Ikshumati
River, which was flowing down from Bodhibhavana Mountain. This region was associated with the
father and grandfather of Dasaratha.


Seeing Brahmans skilled in Vedas who survived by only drinking water through hollows
of their palms, they proceeded through Bahlika kingdom towards a mountain called Sudama.


Perceiving a locality called Vishnu padam, Vipasa river, Salmali trees, rivers,
ponds, tanks, pools and lakes, as well as seeing many kinds of lions, tigers, antelopes and
elephants, they proceeded by that broad lofty high way desirous as they were to execute the command
of their master.


Those messengers, though riding on tired horses on a long route, reached quickly and
safely to the excellent city of Girivraja.


For the sake of fulfilling the beloved object of their master (Vasistha), for the
sake of preserving the royal family and for keeping up the prestige of the sovereign race, those
messengers quickly and respectfully reached that city in the night.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Bharata having returned (to Ayodhya), Rama who was dwelling in the woods, observed
anxiety accompanied by perturbation among the sages.


He saw there those ascetics-who were formerly quite pleased in that hermitage at
Chitrakuta depending as they did on Rama- anxious.


Pointing out to Rama through the movements of their eyes and eye-brows manifesting
their anxiety, they whispered among themselves, narrating some legends in secret.


Perceiving their distress, Rama was filled with apprehension about himself and with
joined palms spoke the following words to a sage, the leader of that community of ascetics:


"O venerable sage! I fear that the conduct of my forefathers is not seen in me or
there is some change for the worse in me, due to which the ascetics feel agitated."


"Has my younger brother, the high-souled Lakshmana, through inadvertence, behaved
unworthy of him while the sages were seeing?"


"I hope that Seetha, who is serving you and who is keen in serving me, does not, I
am afraid, behaved properly, according to the conduct suitable for women."


Then, that grown-up sage, who was elderly both by age and penance, appeared
trembling and spoke to Rama, who was ever compassionate to all beings, as follows:


"O, dear Rama! What is there for us the ascetics to fear above all from Seetha, who
is natural in her disposition and is the follower of virtue?"


"It is on account of demons, who, through enmity to you, have begun to oppress the
sages. Alarmed by it, they discuss with each other how they can best defend themselves."


"O, darling! Here, a demon called Khara, Ravana's younger brother- who is a boaster,
victorious in battle, cruel and eater of human flesh, haughty and sinful-having uprooted all the
ascetics who dwell in Janasthana, is unable to endure you also."


"My darling! From which time you came to dwell in this hermitage, from that time
inwards, the demons continue to ill-treat the ascetics."


"They appear in grotesque and harmful forms, filling them with terror, in diverse
forms and possessing ugly and unnatural demeanor."


"Flinging filthy and inauspicious objects on some of the ascetics, the wicked demons
stand in front of them and kill some ascetics too."


"Having themselves in those hermitages unnoticed, those evil-minded demons delight
themselves in destroying the ascetics there."


"At the time of pouring oblations into the sacred fire, they scatter the sacrificial
vessels, sprinkle the fires with water and break the water-pots."


"Resolved to leave these retreats that have been invaded by evil spirits, the
ascetics today are urging me to go to another area."


"O, Rama! Before those wicked beings indeed show bodily injury to the ascetics, we
are abandoning this hermitage."


"Not far from here, there is a colourful grove yielding many roots and fruits. I
will take shelter again in that previous hermitage itself, along with an assembly of sages."


"O, darling! Khara, the demon will behave unjustly with you in the same way. If your
mind feels so inclined, come along with us from here."


"O, Rama! To you, who live with your wife, though you are competent and ever
watchful, there is a danger. Your stay here is conduced with misery now."


Rama the prince could not with his responsive words desist the said sage when he had
spoken as aforesaid, eager as he was to leave the place.


Having greeted, bidding farewell and justifying his statement to Rama, that leader
of the community departed, leaving the hermitage, along with a host of sages.


Accompanying them for a distance from that place, bidding farewell to that group of
sages, offering his salutation to that ascetic, the leader of the community and taking leave of
them, who were well-pleased and having received their counsel, Rama returned to his dwelling, which
was sacred to reside.


That Rama, the lord, did not leave even for a moment that hermitage that had been
deserted by the sages. But some ascetics among them who had fixed their mind on Rama (who followed
the conduct of the sages) constantly followed Rama.

undefined

undefined

undefined


A brahmana called Jabali spoke the following unrighteous words to Rama, who knew
righteousness and who was assuaging Bharata as aforesaid


"Enough, O Rama! Let not your wisdom be rendered void like a common man, you who are
distinguished for your intelligence and virtue."


"Who is related to whom? What is there to be obtained by anything and by whom? Every
creature is born alone and dies alone."


"O, Rama! He who clings to another, saying, 'This is my father, this is my mother,
he should be known as one who has lost his wits. There is none who belongs to another."


"O, Rama! As one who passes the a strange village spends the night the and the next
day leaves that place and continues his journey, so are mother, father, home and possessions to a
man; they are but a resting place. The wise do not become attached to them".


"O, chief of men! You as such should not abandon your father's kingdom in order to
dwell in a lonely forest, that is excruciating hard to traverse and full of thorny thickets."


"Get yourself crowned in the prosperous kingdom of Ayodhya. That city is waiting for
you, with your locks duly unfound."


"O, prince! Enjoy the royal luxuries worthy of you. Move around in Ayodhya as Indra
the Lord of celestials does in heaven!"


"Dasaratha is none to you nor you in anyway to him. That king is another and your
are another. Hence, do what is told by me?"


"The father is only the seed of a being. The sperm and the ovum blend at the right
time in the mother's womb, so that a human being is born in this world."


"The king has gone, where he had to go. This is the fate of all being unnecessarily,
you are still frustrated over the matter."


"I pity all those whosoever, devoted to wealth and religious merit, not other (who
are devoted to sense-enjoyment), for, they, having undergone suffering in this life, have met with
extermination after death."


"These people say, 'The eighth day should be given up to sacrifices for the spirits
of our ancestors.' See the waste of food. What will a dead man eat?"


"If food eaten by one here, reaches another's body, then let a sacrifice be offered
for those who are setting out on a distant journey. Will it not become a food on their path?"


"Perform sacrifices, distribute gifts, consecrate yourselves, practise ansterity and
renunciation' - These writings are composed by learned men for the sake of inducing others to
give."


"O, the highly wise! Arrive at a conclusion, therefore, that there is nothing beyond
this Universe. Give precedence to that which meets the eye and turn your back on what is beyond our
knowledge."


"Honour the judgment of the wise and regarding that which is approved by all, accept
the kingdom as propitiated by Bharata."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Rama the tiger among men, revolving in his mind the command of his father, covered a
long distance during the rest of the night.


While Rama was traveling with the same alacrity, that delightful night passed away.
Having worshipped the blissful morning twilight, he passed beyond the boundary of that country.


Seeing villages, whose outskirts have been tilled and the woodlands laden with
blossoms and hearing as follows the words of men dwelling together in the midst of the village,
Rama proceeded apace in those excellent horses as though slowly (engrossed as he was in enjoying
the sights).


"Woe unto the king Dasaratha who fell into the clutches of concupiscence. Alas!
Kaikeyi the cruel and the sinful one now is still engaged in a cruel game. She is sending to exile
the prince Rama, the pious man, the great intellectual, the compassionate man and he who subdued
the senses. That hot-tempered Kaikeyi is behaving in a rude manner, transgressing the bounds of
propriety"


"How Sita the venerable woman, the daughter of Janaka, who was delighted always in
homely comforts can now experience hardships in the forest?"


"What a surprise! The king Dasaratha, having no love for his son, now wants to
abandon Rama who is so beloved to the people and is even faultless."


Hearing these words of people residing in villages and hamlets, Rama the heroic
prince of Kosala crossed the boundaries of Kosala state.


Having crossed the river of auspicious waters called Vedashruti, Rama then stretched
forth, facing the quarter occupied by Sage Agastya.


After traveling a pretty long time from there, Rama crossed the river Gomati having
beautiful waters, whose banks were adorned with cows and which headed towards the sea.


Reaching the other bank of Gomati river with the help of the swift moving horses,
Rama crossed the river called Syandika which had resounded with howls of peacocks and swans.


The said Rama showed to Sita the land (of Kosala, the southern boundary of which was
defined by Syandika river)given long ago by the king Manu to Ikshvaku and which was bounded by many
territories.


The glorious Rama, the foremost among men, whose voice resembled the cackling of a
swan in rut, addressed the charioteer with great affection, in the words "Oh, charioteer!" and
spoke as follows :


"When, coming back and united with my mother and father, shall I roam hunting in the
forest, bordering on Sarayu river and laden with blossoms?"


"I do not hanker much after hunting in the woodlands bordering on Sarayu river. In
fact it is a delightful spot, made much of in the world by hosts of royal sages. Hunting in the
forest is indeed for gratification of royal sages in this world. At times; the bow- men adopted it.
But I do not long for it excessively."


Uttering in sweet voice to the charioteer on various topics dearer to him, Rama
advanced thus along that route.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Bharata rose up at day-break, mounted on excellent chariot and went quickly with a
desire to see Rama.


All the ministers and priests ascended, chariots yoked with horses, resembling those
of the sun, and went ahead of Bharata.


Nine thousand elephants suitably duly arranged escorted Bharata the joy of the
Ikshvaku dynasty, on his journey.


Sixty thousand chariots filled with archers, furnished with weapons of various
kinds, followed the illustrious prince Bharata.


A hundred thousand cavalry accompanied the moving Bharata, born in Raghu dynasty,
who was true to his promise and who subdued his senses.


Kaikeyi, Sumitra and the illustrious Kausalya rode in a resplendent chariot,
delighted as they were at the thought of Rama's return.


The whole body of noble men with their jubiliant hearts followed Bharata to see Rama
again as also Lakshmana, recounting the marvelous exploits of that hero to each other saying:


"When shall we see the mighty armed prince, of the hue of dark cloud, whose courage
is unshakable, of inflexible purpose Rama, who banished sorrow from the earth?"


"Beholding Rama, our entire sorrow will indeed be dispelled, as darkness of the
entire earth is dispelled at the rising of the sun."


Thus did the citizens of Ayodhya recount happily of Rama's glorious deeds, and they
embraced each other as they went along.


Those others who were held in high esteem, merchants and all common people proceeded
merrily to join Rama.


Some lapidaries, skilled potters, those who lived by manufacture of arms,
carpenters, those who made various articles from peacock-feather, sawyers, workers in artificial
ornaments, those who pierced gems, pearls etc, those who made articles of ivory, those who lived by
perfumery, highly reputed goldsmiths, weavers of blankets and other wollen goods, those who
provided hot-water baths for other, physicians, distillers and vendors of spirituous liquors,
fumigators, washer-men, tailors, chiefs of villages and hamlets, dancers with their women-folk and
fishermen started on the journey.


Thousands of Brahmanas, well-composed, renowned for their virtuous conduct, versed
in sacred scriptures and riding on bullock-carts, accompanied Bharata.


All of them, attired in clean and fair raiment, anointed with pure red sandal-paste,
mounted on various kinds of vehicles, followed Bharata tranquilly.


Exceedingly pleased and cheerful, that army escorted the son of Kaikeyi- Bharta who
was affectionate towards his brother and who had set out along with his family to bring his
brother, Rama.


Having gone for a considerable distance in their chariots, carts, horses and
elephants, they reached the River Ganga close to the city of Shringaberapura, where the valiant
Guha, a bosom friend of Rama along with multitude of relatives was ruling that region
carefully.


That army, which was accompanying Bharata, arrived at the bank of Ganga River,
looking beautiful as it was with Charka* birds and stopped there.


Seeing the army behind, which accompanied him and the River Ganga in front with its
propitious waters, Bharata who was skillful in words, spoke to all his officers (as follows):


"It is my will that my army should take rest by all means. When they are refreshed
we shall cross the river tomorrow."


"Meanwhile, descending into the river, I desire to make offering of the sacred water
as libation for the infinite spirit relating to the state after death, to the king Dasaratha who
has gone to heaven."


Hearing these words from Bharata, the officers attentively answered, "Be it so" and
each of them encamped their respective forces in accord with his pleasure.


Having meticulously arranged for encampment of the army which looked lovely along
Ganga that great river with the surrounding equipment (like tunts, furnishings etc), Bharata halted
then, reflecting as to how to bring back the magnanimous Rama.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Seeing that large army on the march, the herds of beasts with their leaders, the
denizens of the woods were frightened and ran away together.


Bears, dappled deer and antelopes could be seen every where, on the tracks of the
forest, on the hills and by the rivers.


That pious minded Bharata gracefully marched ahead, surrounded by that clamorous
army of four divisions.


The army, of the magnanimous Bharata, which resembled the high tide of an ocean,
covered the earth as clouds cover the sky in a rainy season.


Submerged by the waves of horses and elephants of great speed at that time, the
earth became invisible for a long time.


Having travelled for a long distance, that glorious Bharata, whose animals were now
fully exhausted, said to Vasishta, the most segaceios of his counsellors (as follows)


"Looking at the features of the pace and from what has been heard by me, it is clear
that we reached that area of which Bharadwaja spoke."


"This mountain is Chitrakuta. This river is Mandakini. This forest is appearing like
a blue cloud from a distance."


"By my elephants appearing themselves like mountains, the lovely peaks of Chitrakuta
mountain are being trampled."


"These trees on the peaks of the mountain are shedding flowers, as black and intense
clouds shower water in a rainy season."


"Behold, O Shatrughna, this mountain, (hitherto) frequented by Kinnaras, now teaming
with horses on every side, as a sea is infested by allegators."


"These herds of antelopes, having a rapid speed, as urged forward (by the troops)
appear like a mass of clouds driven by the wind in the sky in antumn."


"Those tree, with their leaves in multitude dazzling, crowned with fragrant chaplets
of flowers, resemble the people of the south."


"This forest, which was silent and wore a terrifying look till now, appears to me
like Ayodhya, swarning with people."


"The dust raised from the hooves of the horses blots out the heavens, but the wind
carries it away immediately as if to give me pleasure."


"Behold, O Shatrughna, these chariots yoked with horses and mounted by the chief
charioteers are rushing together rapidly in the forest."


"Behold these peacocks and birds, which are pleasant to the sight, are frightened
and are entering their dwelling places hastily."


"This place to me is appearing very much lovely. Resembling in every way like a
threshold of heaven, it is clearly an abode of ascetics."


"In this forest, many dappled deer with their hinds, endowed with enchanting forms,
are seen as if studded with flowers."


"Let the soldiers proceed quickly to explore the woods to find those tigers among
men, Rama and Lakshamana."


Hearing the words of Bharata, valiant men wearing weapons in their hands, penetrated
into the forest suddenly they observed a plume of smoke rising.


Seeing that spiral of smoke, they returned to bharata and said; "There can be no
fire in a deserted place. Assuredly, Rama and Lakshmana are there."


"If it be not those two tigers among men, the two princes, the scourger of their
foes here, obviously there are other ascetics like Rama here."


Hearing those words concurred even by pious men, Bharata the destroyer of enemy's
forces, spoke to the entire army (as follows)


"You stay here vigilantly. Do no proceed any further. I alone will go along with
Sumantra and also Dhriti, my spiritual preceptor."


On this command, all the troops halted there and Bharat with his gaze fixed on the
column of smoke, went forward.


The army, which was held up there by Bharata, eventhough perceiving the place ahead,
felt rejoiced in the thought of meeting their beloved Rama soon.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Just on seeing an army encamped and positioned along the River Ganga, Guha the king
of Nishadas hastily spoke to his relatives as follows:


"On this side, a huge army is seen like an ocean. I am not able to comprehend the
extent of this army even by my discerning mind."


"Here is seen on that chariot, a towering banner bearing Kovidara tree and hence
Bharata himself with an evil intent seems to have come."


"Will Bharata the son of Kaikeyi bind us with chains or slay us? Or is he coming to
kill Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who was exiled from the kingdom by his father, desirous as Bharata
is to get the prosperous Ayodhya kingdom, a luxury and that which is inaccessible to another?"


"Rama the son of Dasaratha is my Lord and my companion too. Hence you, covered with
armor, be stationed on this bank of Ganga River, desiring to advance the interest of Rama."


"Let all our ferrymen guarding the river, along with the troops, eating meat roots
and fruits ( in their boats), stay positioned along the River Ganga."


"Let five hundred boats, each manner by a hundred youthful ferrymen, be stationed
and made ready" -thus announced Guha.


"If Bharata is favourably disposed now towards Rama, then only his army may (be
allowed to) cross the River Ganga in safety."


After uttering thus, Guha the king of Nishadas took fish, meat and honey as an
offering and approached Bharata.


Seeing him approach, Sumantra the charioteer, a majestic man who knows the rules of
discipline, humbly told Bharata as follows:


"This Lord who is surrounded by a thousand of his own people, is fully acquainted
with the forest of Dandaka and also an old friend of your elder brother."


"O, Bharata! For that reason, let Guha the king of Nishadas see you. He knows surely
where those two Rama and Lakshmana - are stationed."


Hearing the auspicious words of Sumantra, Bharata answered, "Introduce Guha to me
without delay."


Having obtained permission, Guha along with his own people, joyfully and humbly
approached Bharata and spoke as follows:


"This place is like a pleasure-grove near your house. We are your subjects and are
reporting to you as such. Stay in this servant's house."


"Here are the roots and fruits gathered by my tribe as well as fresh and dried meat
of great quality and of various kinds, and all a produce of the forest."


"I hope the army, after eating well, can halt for the night here. Furnished with all
you could desire, you can continue your journey tomorrow along with your troops."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Then, bards and pangegyrists, who knew the importance of tidings, eulogized Bharata
with auspicious hymns of praise on the night preceding Naandimukha.


A drum from the sound of which nigh-hours are identified, struck with a golden
stick, gave its sound. Couches and loud-sounding instruments in hundreds producing various types of
noises were blown.


That mammoth sound of the musical instruments, as if filling up the whole sky,
created further distress and grief to Bharata who was already tormented with grief.


Then, the awakened Bharata proclaiming that "I am not the king", caused to stop that
sound and spoke the following words to shatrughna:


"Behold, O, Shatrughna! How much harm was done to the world by Kaikeyi! The king
Dasartha left us, leaving all sorrows to me."


"This prosperous kingdom of Ayodhya, a foundation of law and religion of that
high-souled Dasaratha the righteous king is now like boat without a rudder moving hitter and
thither in water.


"Even that Rama, who was a great protector has been sent to the forest by this very
mother of mine, abandoning her righteousness."


Seeing Bharata who lost his consciousness by lamenting in that way, all the women
then miserably cried in one voice.


While Bharata was lamenting thus, the great illustrious Vasishta who knew the rules
relating to kings, entered the assembly-hall of Dasaratha the Lord of Ikshvaku dynasty.


The pious minded Vasishta along with his attendants entered that lovely
assembly-hall, made of gold and studded with gems and jewels, resembling Sudharma the celestial
assembly-hall.


Vasista, who knew all the scriptures, then sat in a presidential chair made of gold
and wrapped with a comfortable cushion. He ordered the messengers as follows:


"Quickly bring Brahmanas (a class of people having divine knowledge), Kshatriyas
(people belonging to warrior-class), Vaisyas (agriculturists and traders), ministers and troop
commanders coolly. There is an urgent duty indeed for us to be done.


"Bring Shatrughna with his royal attendants, the illustrious Bharata, Yudhaajit
(Bharata's maternal uncle) Sumantra the charioteer and those people who are royal well-wishers
there."


There was a huge hallooing sound generated while the people invited were coming on
chariots, horses and elephants.


People of high position like ministers and other welcomed the approaching Bharata in
every way as they had welcomed Dasaratha and as Indra was welcomed by celestials.


That royal assembly, made splendid by Bharata the son of Dasartha, radiated as
before as with the presence of Dasaratha, like a lake of tranquil waters sown with pearls shells
and sand and filled with great fish and serpents.

undefined

undefined

undefined


After having passed the tenth day of the death of Dasaratha, Bharata having himself
purified, performed Shraddha* rites on the arrival of the twelfth day.


On the occasion of Shraddha rites, Bharata gave precious stones, money, a lot of
cooked rice, very valuable clothes and various other kinds of presents to Brahmans.


In that ceremony performed in honor of the dead king, Bharata the son of Dasaratha
gave multitudes of white goats, hundreds of cows, servants and servant maids, vehicles and very big
houses to Brahmans.


Then, at the time of dawn on the thirteenth day, the mighty armed Bharata who came
for clearing up bones and ashes, wept in grief, his throat being choked of sound (because of
crying) and spoke in great distress the following words, having reached the foot of his father's
funeral pile (to collect the bones and ashes for their immersion in Sarayu River).


"O, father! My brother Rama to whose care I was entrusted by you, having gone on
exile to the forest, I now become abandoned wholly alone, by you."


"O, king! O, father! Where have you gone, leaving Kausalya the mother whose son
Rama, her support, has been sent away from home to the forest?"


Seeing that spot of collection (of bones), which became reddish brown in colour
because of ashes, with bones consumed by fire and his father's body having extinguished, Bharata
was depressed and began to cry loudly.


Miserable as he was to see the spot, Bharata fell weeping on the ground, as a flag
staff fastened by any mechanical contrivance would drop down while being raised in honor of Indra
the god of celestials.


All his ministers hastily approached Bharata who was virtuous in conduct, as sages
once rushed to the fallen Yayati at the time of his death.


Seeing Bharata, Shatrughna was also overwhelmed with grief and while recollecting
the king, fell unconscious on the ground.


Remembering the many gestures of his father resulting from his loving qualities made
from time to time, Shatrughna was lamenting (as follows) like one who has lost his wits, bewildered
as he was.


"We are immersed in a violent and appalling ocean of sorrow invoked by Mandhara, in
which Kaikeyi in the form of a crocodile swam in its current the irrevocable boons granted to her
by my father."


"O, father! Where have you gone leaving the lamenting Bharata, your boy always being
caressed by you."


"You used to fulfill the wishes of all of us, in the matter of eatables, drinks,
clothes, and jewels. Who else will do it (now) for us."


"That earth which is deprived of you, the high soled and righteous king, is not
riven even when it is the time to be riven."


"The father having obtained heaven and Rama having taken refuge in a forest, what is
the significance of life for me? I shall enter a fire."


"Bereft of my brother and father, I can not return to the deserted city of Ayodhya,
where Ikshvaku used to reign. I shall retire to a hermitage."


Hearing the lamentation of both of them and beholding their plight, all their
companions were disturbed very much, once again.


Both Shatrughna, and Bharata were wearied with grief and began to roll on the
ground, like two bulls whose horns have been broken.


Then, Vasista, a noble man, a learned man and the family priest of their father,
raised up that Bharata from the ground and spoke the following words:


"O, Lord Bharata! This is the thirteenth day of the death of your father. Why are
you hanging down here, when the ceremony of collecting the bones is still unfinished?"


"The three pairs of opposites (namely hunger and thirst, joy and sorrow; birth and
death) occur to all living beings without any distinction. They being inevitable, you ought not to
behave like this."


Even Sumantra, who knew the Truth, raising up Shatrughna and pacifying him, told him
about the origin and dissolution of all beings.


The two illustrious tigers among men (Bharata and Satrughna) who had got up,
appeared like two banners severally raised in honor of Indra (the god of celestials) soiled through
rain and the sun.


The ministers hurried up the princes, who were wiping their tears and who were
talking pitiably with their eyes reddened (due to excessive weeping) to expedite the other rites
pertaining to the thirteenth day.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, keeping the sandals on his head, Bharata delightfully ascended his
chariot along with Shatrughna.


Before him, Vasishta, Vasudeva of firm vows, Jabali and all the ministers
distinguished for their counsels, went ahead.


Them, they advanced eastwards, by the charming Mandakini River, after making a round
of Chitrakuta Mountain.


Observing various types of thousands of enchanting rocks, Bharata advanced along
with his troops along the side of the mountain.


In the vicinity of Chitrakuta Mountain, Bharata saw a hermitage where the sage
Bharadwaja resided.


Then, that Bharata endowed with understanding reached that hermitage of Bharadwaja,
descended from his chariot and bowed down to the feet of Bharadwaja in saluation.


The, Bharadvaja full of joy, enquired of Bharata saying, "O, dear prince! Has your
purpose been accomplished? Have you met Rama?"


Hearing the words of the learned sage, Bharadvaja, Bharata who was affectionate
towards his brothers, replied to Bharadvaja (as follows)


Despite the entreaties of his preceptor and of mine, Rama is unshakeable in his
resolve and most cheerfully spoke the following words to Vasishta.


"I shall honour the promise of my father scrupulously and reside in the forest for
fourteen years as I promised him."


Hearing the words of Rama, the highly wise Vasishta, the knower of proper mode of
expression, replied to Rama who is the most skilful of orators, in the following great words:


"O, the extremely segacious prince! Bestow joyfully thse gold-encrusted sandals of
yours on us and ensure peace and harmony in Ayodhya."


"Hearing the words of Vasishta, Rama stood up and turning to the East, placed his
feet in those sandals and gave them to me as a sign of regency."


"Having taken leave of the very high-souled Rama, I turned back after receiving the
auspicious sandals. Now, I am proceeding to Ayodhya."


Hearing those auspicious words of the high-souled Bharata, the sage Bharadvaja spoke
to him the following words.


"O Bharata the Tiger among men and excellent among those having virtue and good
conduct! There is no surprise that a noble trait prevails in you, as naturally as the water allowed
to go, always settles downwards."


"Your valiant father, Dasaratha, is immortal in having such a son as you are, the
knower of righteousness and loving peity."


Hearing the words of that sage, Bharata with his joined palms, touched his feet in
salutation and began taking leave from him.


Then, the glorious Bharata made circumambulation again and again to Bharadwaja and
proceeded to Ayodhya along with hims ministers.


Thata extensive army of Bharata, following him with vehicles, carts and elephants,
turned back again towards Ayodhya.


Thereafter, all of them crossed the charming River Yamuna wreathed with waves and
moreover saw the River Ganga with its pure water.


Bharata accompanied by his relative and his army crossed that River Ganga, full of
charming waters and entered the beautiful town of Shringibhera. From Shringibhera, he saw Ayodhya
again.


Beholding the City of Ayodhya, which was bereft of his father and brother, Bharata
tormented with grief, spoke the following words to the charioteer:


"O, Charioteer! See that Ayodhya city, ruined, with a vacant look, joyless,
miserable, and with an impeded voice."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Rama the annihilator of enemies heard those harsh and deadly words but was
unruffled. He spoke these words to Kaikeyi.


"Let it be, as you said it. I shall fulfil the king's promise, go to the forest from
here to reside there, wearing braided hair and covered with a hide."


"But I want to know why the king, the inviolable and the subduer of enemies, is not
greeting me today as before."


"Oh, queen! you need not be indignant. I am telling before you that I shall go to
the forest, wearing rags and braided hair. Become delighted well."


"How can I not do faithfully an action dear to my father, as commanded by him as
well-wisher, venerable man, as person with right conduct and as king."


"My heart is burning indeed with one sorrowful feeling that king himself has not
informed me about Bharata's coronation."


"Without being asked, I myself would have gladly offered even Sita with kingdom,
even my life, loved ones and wealth."


"Being directed by king, who is my father himself, how much more should I tell that
I can give everything to Bharata, duly obeying father's promise to fulfil your beloved desire."


"That is why, you console him. Why indeed the king is thus slowly shedding tears,
with eyes gazed upon the floor?"


"Let messengers go now itself on fleet horses to bring Bharata from maternal uncle's
house as per orders of the king."


"Immediately, I shall go to live in forest of Dandaka for fourteen years, without
reflecting on whether my father's words are right or wrong."


Hearing Rama's words, Kaikeyi felt glad that he would certainly go and urged him to
make haste at once.


"Let it be so. Messengers can go on horses having rapid speed, to bring back Bharata
from his maternal uncle's house."


"But I think it is not quite appropriate for you who are enthusiastic to go to
forest, to delay further."


"It is nothing but shyness that the king is not able to speak to you. Oh Rama, the
best of men! Do not worry about it."


"Oh, Rama! Your father will neither take his bath nor eat a meal until you leave the
city for the forest immediately.


Hearing these words, the king saying "what a pity! How much misery!" was overwhelmed
with sorrow, fainted and fell in that couch adorned with gold.


Rama lifted up the king and soon got hurried up to leave for the forest he was again
instigated by Kaikeyi as a horse was hit by a whip.


Rama after hearing that vulgar woman's words, which were harsh and having
consequence, was unruffled and spoke these words to Kaikeyi.


"Oh queen! I am not concerned with wealth. I want to receive the world hospitable.
Know me as equal to a sage, abiding in righteousness alone."


"If I have to do whatever action is dearer to my revered father, that action is just
done in all respects even by renouncing life."


"There is not indeed anything of greater performance of duty than doing service to
father or than doing what he commands."


"Even if our reverent father does not tell me, I shall reside in the forest, devoid
of people, now for fourteen years as per your word."


" In the matter of coronation of Bharata, you told Dasaratha and not to me, even
though you had every authority to tell, me directly. By this, it is known that you have not seen
any merit in me. It is certain!"


" Today itself, I shall go to the forest of Dandaka after bidding, farewell to my
mother and also after consoling Sita."


"While ruling the kingdom, see that Bharata serves our father well. It is indeed an
age-old practice."


Dasaratha after hearing Rama's words was hurt very much with grief was unable to
talk and wept loudly.


That Rama, with great brilliance, came out, after duly offering obeisance to the
feet of his father who was fainted and also to the feet of that vulgar Kaikeyi.


Rama made circumambulatory salutation to his father as well as Kaikeyi, left that
palace and saw his friends.


Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, felt very angry with his eyes filled with tears and
accompanied behind Rama.


Rama did a circumbulatory salutation around the auspicious materials collected for
the propound coronation and having fixed his attention respectfully on them, moved away slowly.


As Rama was a pleasing personality, he was loved by all the people. The loss of
kingdom could not diminish such a great splendour of Rama as a night cannot diminish the splendour
of the moon.


In that Rama, who was leaving the kingdom after having decided to go to the forest,
there was no perturbation of mind in him like in an ascetic who is beyond worldly pain and
pleasure.


Rama, the man of great courage, refused fans and umbrella, sent away his friends,
chariot and citizens kept back sorrow in his mind, subdued his senses and entered his mother's
house to inform the unpleasant news.


The people adjacent to Rama could not visualise any change in the face of Rama who
was dignified and truthful in his words.


Rama did not lose his natural joy, as an autumnal moon with lofty rays does not lose
its natural splendour.


Rama with his courageous spirit and of great fame, paying his respects to the people
with his sweet words, went nearer to his mother.


Lakshmana, who got virtues equal to Rama, who was having great heroic valour and who
was the brother, kept the grief within himself and went along with Rama.


When Rama entered, Kausalya's palace was filled with great joy. At that time, Rama
did not show any displeasure for the mihlap occurred in truth. He behaved like that because he had
doubted about the possible shock to his friends even of fear of their life, if he showed any
perturabation.

undefined

undefined

undefined


While Bharata was narrating his dream, the messengers whose horses were tired,
entered the beautiful city called Rajagriha, which has too big a palace-gate and met the king
Kekeya and the prince Yudhajit, who received them hospitably. They saluted the feet of the king
Kekeya and spoke the following words to Bharata:


"Vasistha, the family-priest and all the ministers were asking about your welfare.
Come forth indeed quickly. There is an urgent work with you."


"O, Bharata the wide-eyed man! Take these very valuable clothes and jewels and give
them to your maternal uncle"


"O, prince! In these jewels and clothes, a worth of hundred crores is to be given to
the king Kekeya and likewise a worth of ten crores in full to your maternal uncle."


Bharata, who had a great affection towards his kind hearted relatives, took all
that, honored these messengers profusely with gifts of their liking and spoke(as follows) :


"I hope that king Dasaratha, my father is quite safe. I also hope that Rama and the
high-soled Lakshmana are well."


"Is Kausalya, the venerable lady, who is intent on virtue, who knows righteousness,
who visualizes goodness and who is the mother of the wise Rama, also well? "


"I hope that Sumitra, who knows righteousness, who is the mother of Lakshmana as
well as the heroic Satrughna and our middle mother, is well."


"As Kaikeyi, who loves herself, a forever fiery lady of wrathful nature, who prides
herself to be highly intelligent and my mother, also well? What did she say?"


On hearing the words of the high soled Bharata, those messengers then respectfully
spoke to Bharata as follows:


"O, tiger among men! Those, of whom you do enquire, are all well. The goddess of
prosperity, holding a lotus in her hand, awaits you. Let your chariot be made ready."


Hearing the words Bharata spoke to the messengers as follows: "I will get permission
from the monarch(to leave for Ayodhya) saying that the messengers are hastening me up."


Bharata the prince having been asked to move quickly (to Ayodhya) by the messengers,
spoke as aforesaid to those messengers and uttered the following words to his maternal uncle:


"O, king! Requested by the messengers to come to Ayodhya urgently, I am going to my
father's presence. I shall again come, whenever you recall me."


Hearing the words of Bharata, the king Kekeya, his maternal uncle smelled (as a
token of affection) the head of Bharata and spoke the following auspicious words:


"Go, my dear child! I am permitting you. Kaikeyi is fortunate to have a good son
like you. Bear my greetings to your mother and father."


" My dear child! Pay obeisance to your family priest, the other illustrious Brahmins
and your brothers Rama and Lakshmana the wielders of bows."


The king Kekaya, treating him hospitably gave that Bharata the best of elephants,
woolen clothes of varied colors, antelope skins and riches (gold and silver vessels etc).


The king Kekeya generously gave as gifts to Bharata, two thousands coins of gold and
sixteen hundred horses.


Likewise, Aswapati sent some attendants, who were dear, reliable, endowed with
virtues and inmates of his palace with Bharata (to accompany him on the return journey)


Yuddhajit, his maternal uncle gave him as gifts, elephants of Airavata race born in
Indrasira mountain-range and which were charming to behold as well as mules which could walk
quickly and were well trained


He gave as a gift, large bodied dogs, which were well nourished in the gynoecium,
possessing strength and vitality of a tiger and which were using their tusks as weapons.


The wealth of gifts bestowed by the king Kekeya did not rejoice Bharata, Kaikeyi's
son, who was then in a hurry to go.


Due to goading of messengers and visualization of the dream, a very big worry was
formed at that time in his heart.


The glorious Bharata crossed his very big palace, augmented with men elephants and
horses and entered the excellent royal high way.


The sagacious Bharata crossed the royal high way and perceived the gynoecia. Then,
the glorious Bharata entered those gynoecia.


Bharata took leave of his maternal grandfather and also Yudhajit, his maternal uncle
and set out on a chariot (for Ayodhya) along with Satrughna.


With more than hundred chariots variegated with jewels yoked to camels, bullocks,
horses and mules as also servants followed Bharata as he departed.


Being protected by the army, the high soled Bharata, who was free from enemies,
taking Shatrughna along with other companions good enough to him, started from the palace of his
venerable maternal uncle, as a Siddha(a semi- divine being of great purity and perfection and said
to possess supernatural faculties) would start from Indraloka( the world of celestials).

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, when the sages departed, Rama, reflecting again and again, found no
pleasure to remain in that place for many reasons.


"It is here that Bharata, my mother along with the inhabitants of the city visited
me. That memory haunts me, who lament for them daily."


"The dry dung of horses and elephants of that high souled Bharata's encamped army
caused much spoliation (around here)."


"We shall, therefore, move elsewhere", pondering thus, Rama along with Seetha and
Lakshmana left that place.


On the way, after reaching the hermitage of a sage called Atri, the highly
celebrated Rama offered salutation to that sage. The venerable sage, Atri too received him as his
own son.


Offering personally, abundant hospitality with full honours to Rama, the sage Atri
rendered equal honour to Lakshmana and the highly blessed Seetha too.


Atri, who knew righteousness and who was interested in the welfare of all beings,
called his aged wife Anasuya who had just come there, she who was revered by all and addressed
gently to her.


Atri excellent sage spoke to the illustrious Anasuya, rich in asceticism and who
lived a pious life, saying "You welcome Videha's daughter!" and thereafter introduced that virtuous
female ascetic to Rama (as follows):


"O, Irreproachable Rama! When the earth was burnt up by drought without break for
ten years, this virtuous woman produced fruit and roots, caused the River Jahnavi to flow here,
undergoing a rigid mortification enriched by pious observances, by whom the most severe asceticism
was practised for ten thousand years and obstacles were done away with and by whom for the reason
of a divine command, in a great hurry ten nights were reduced to one night.* This Anasuya, who has
bathed after completion of the voes, is like a mother to you."


"Let Seetha find refuge with that ascetic, who is revered by all the beings, famous
as she is and though old is ever free from anger."


Saying "Be it so" to the aforesaid sage, who was speaking thus, Rama spoke to the
virtuous Seetha, the following excellent words:


"O, princess! You have heard what the sage has said. For your own good, approach the
saintly Anasuya without delay."


Hearing these words of Rama, who is desirous of her welfare, Seetha the daughter of
Mithila circumambulated around Anasuya, Atri's wife, who knows piety.


Seetha coolly and reverently paid homage to that fortunate Anasuya, a devoted and
virtuous wife, who was feeble, wrinkled, aged, with her hair turned grey due to old age, and whose
frame constantly shook like a banana tree in a storm. Seetha introduced herself, by announcing her
name to Anasuya.


Saluting the irreproachable ascetic the rejoiced Seetha with joined palms enquired
about he well-being.


Then, comforting that celebrated Seetha, engaged in righteous acts, Anasuya
rejoicingly spoke as follows: "Luckily enough, you are attending to righteousness."


"O, Seetha the beautiful lady! Thank heaven! Leaving your relatives, honour and
prosperity, you are accompanying Rama, who is expelled into a forest."


"Highly fortunate worlds await those women, await those women, to whom their husband
is dear no matter whether he lives in a city or in a forest; whether he is sinful or virtuous."


"To women of noble nature, the husband is the highest deity no mater whether he is
ill-behaved or licentious or devoid of riches."


"O, Seetha! On a reflection, I perceive none who is a better friend than a husband,
who protects his wife in all circumstances, like the imperishable fruit of one's austerities."


"Those evil women, whose hearts follow their passions and conduct themselves
dominating their husband, having no understanding of virtue and vice, do not follow him in the
aforesaid manner."


"O, Seetha! Surely, those evil women, who get into an improper act of authority over
their husbands reap infamy and decline in righteousness."


"Women, like you, on the other hand who are endowed with virtues, who look with
detachment on prosperity and adversity in this world, therefore dwell in heaven as those who
performed meritorious deeds."


"Thus devoted to your lord, loyal to your husband, following established rules, you
become an honest wife to your husband and obtain merit and renown."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Then Rama taking his position at the banks of Tamasa river and looking at Sita,
spoke to Lakshmana as follows :


"Oh, Lakshmana! We have been sent to the forest. Today is the first night of our
residence in the forest .You ought not feel anxious. May all be well with you!"


"Look here: As the animals and birds are returning to their respective abodes
seeking for shelter, the desolate woods seem to be crying from all sides"


"Now, the city of Ayodhya the capital of my father with its men and women will
lament about us that have departed (to the forest). There is no doubt"


"Oh, tiger among men! The citizens (of Ayodhya) are indeed having affection to the
king no less than to you and myself, as also to Bharata and Satrughna, for many of our
virtues."


"I feel repented for my father and my illustrious mother. I fear whether they will
become even blind, by weeping incessantly."


"Bharata, the virtuous man, can indeed console my father and mother by his kind
words."


"Oh,Lakshmana! Thinking of Bharata's kindness again and again, I do not grieve for
our father and mother"


"Oh, Lakshmana, tiger among men! You have done well by accompanying me, as
otherwise, a help would have to be sought for by me for protecting Seetha"


" Oh, Lakshmana! I shall live on water alone tonight. Though there are various kinds
of wild fruits and roots, this is indeed a liking for me"


Thus telling Lakshmana, Rama spoke also to Sumantra as follows: "Oh, gentle man!
Attend to the horses carefully."


The sun having completely set, Sumantra tied up the horses, supplied them with
abundant grass and immediately stood nearest (to Rama).


Having worshipped the beautiful evening twilight and having seen the night come
nearer, Sumantra along with Lakshmana made the bed for Rama.


Seeing that bed made of leaves of a tree on the bank of Tamasa river with the help
of Lakshmana, Rama along with his wife laid down on it.


Seeing that brother sleeping along with his wife, Lakshmana narrated Rama's various
virtues to Sumantra.


WhileLakshmana was thus recounting Rama's excellences to Sumantra, keeping awake
that whole night at the bank of Tamasa river, the sun rose.


At a good distance from Tamasa river, whose banks were crowded with herds of cows,
Rama passed that night there with the citizens.


Getting up from the bed and seeing those citizens, Rama with an extraordinary
splendor, spoke to his brother, Lakshmana who was endowed with auspicious bodily marks:


"Observe, Oh Lakshmana, the citizens full of longing for us, unmindful even of their
homes, sleeping together at the roots of trees, Oh, the son of Sumitra!"


"From the way in which these citizens are making coercion to take us back (to
Ayodhya), it seems they will even lay down their lives, but in no case would give up their
resolve"


"Till which time the citizens are asleep, within that time, let us quickly mount the
chariot and take a route which has no fear from any quarter"


"From this the citizens of Ayodhya (the ancient capital of Ikshvaku), who are
longing for me, may not sleep as of now, at the roots of trees again and again"


"The residents of city should indeed be made free of their suffering brought about
by (citizens) themselves, by the sons of their rulers. The citizens should on no account be
burdened with hardship caused by (princes) them selves as is our case."


Lakshmana replied as follows to Rama, who is standing firm like righteousness
personified: "Oh, wise brother! What you say is agreeable to me. (Pray) ascend the chariot
quickly"


Then, the glorious Rama spoke to the charioteer as follows: "Oh, capable man! Keep
the chariot ready. I shall proceed to the forest. Let us go quickly from here."


Then, Sumantra quickly fastened the chariot to its excellent horses and thereafter
submitted with joined palms to Rama (as follows):


"Oh, mighty armed prince! Your chariot is kept ready. You ascend it along with Sita
and with Lakshmana, Oh jewel among car-warriors! May prosperity attend you"


Rama mounted the chariot with all necessaries (like bow, armor, quiver, spade,
basket, and so on) and crossed the swift flowing Tamasa river, thickly set with whirl- pools.


Having duly crossed the stream, the glorious Rama the mighty armed reached a great
road free from obstacles and safe even for those who are apprehensive of danger.


In order to elude the citizens, Rama spoke to Sumantra as follows: "Oh, charioteer!
You mount the chariot and go northward. Proceed for a while quickly and bring back the chariot
again. Remaining careful, do it in such a way that the citizens may not be able to locate me"


Hearing Rama's advice, the charioteer made a round of the chariot as he was
suggested and on returning, reported to Rama about the arrival of the chariot.


Then, Rama and Lakshmana(the promoters of the race of Raghu) along with Sita
ascended the chariot yoked together. The charioteer urged the horses along the route by which they
can reach a grove suited to the practice of austerities.


However, Sumantra placed that chariot by facing it to the north, for he saw omens
auspicious for journey (in that quarter). Rama (son of Dasaratha) the mighty car-warrior, along
with the charioteer mounted the chariot and proceeded to the forest.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Hearing that his father was dead and both his brothers were exiled; Bharata was
tormented with grief and spoke the following words:


Bereft of my father as well as my brother too, who is exactly like my father, what
is the use of a kingdom now to me, lamenting as I am with despair?"


"Making Dasaratha to die and turning Rama to be an ascetic, you brought one calamity
after another like sprinkling salt on a wound."


"You came for destruction of our race, like the night of destruction coming at the
end of the world. My father could not be aware of his embracing a live char-coal to his bosom."


"O, the malevolent woman! You caused the death of my father. O, the one who made our
race unchaste! In this race, happiness is deserted through your ignorance."


"My father, king Dasaratha, who was true to his promise and immensely famous, now
died, tormented as he was with bitter grief, because of you."


"Why did you kill my father the monarch, who was intent on righteousness? Why did
you send Rama on exile to the forest?"


"It is impossible that Kausalya and Sumitra, who are afflicted with grief for their
sons, will live in fellowship with you, my mother."


"Even Rama my elder brother, a pious man who knows how to behave with elders, used
to act with the best behavior in your case, exactly as how he was behaving with his own
mother."


"In the same manner, Kausalya, my elder mother having far sightedness and
established in piety, indeed used to behave with you as your sister."


"Why are you not lamenting, after sending Rama, the disciplined Kausalya 's son,
clothed in a bark dress, to live in a forest? O, sinful one!"


"You indeed sent into exile, clad in a bark dress, Rama having a virtuous
disposition, a valiant man, a self controlled and illustrious man as he was. What reason do you
gather for it?"


"I think it is not known to you, a greedy woman, about my devotion towards Rama. It
is exactly so. You have brought in this great calamity for the sake of a kingdom."


"By which source of strength can I be able to protect the kingdom, without those
lions among men, Rama and Lakshmana in proximity to me?"


"Dasaratha the monarch, having great strength and a pious mind always indeed used to
take refuge in that strong man Rama as the Meru mountain takes refuge in a forest surrounding the
mountain."


"By what stamina, shall I sustain this burden of kingship any more than a young
bullock that is yet to be tamed, would stand the strain on getting a load, lifted up with ease by a
giant bullock."


"Or even if a strength can be brought into existence in me by following certain
suitable methods or by strength of intelligence, I will not allow you, who are greedy in fetching
of kingdom for your son, to fulfill your desire."


"No aversion would be felt by me even to desert you, a woman of evil designs, if
Rama did not treat you like a mother at all times."


"O, malevolent woman with your good conduct disappeared! How this idea forbidden by
our ancestors, has arisen in your mind at all?"


"The eldest of all in this race should be indeed anointed as a king. The rest of his
brothers are to behave reverently towards their elder brother."


"O, cruel woman! I feel that you are not catching even a glimpse of the rules
relating to kings or not even aware of a permanent procedure prevailing in the administration of
kings."


"According to the administration of kings the eldest son always indeed gets
inaugurated in kingdom. This procedure is similar to all kings; especially so in the case of
Ikshvaku kings."


"The pride of reputation of those belonging to Ikshvaku race, who protect
righteousness alone and who possessed good family conduct, is turned away by you today."


"Even kings belonging to your ancestral race were great people. How has this
contemptible stupidity of mind born in you?"


"O, woman with evil designs! I for one will not fulfill your desire. A criminal act,
which will cause even an end to my life, has been undertaken by you."


"Now itself at the cause of your dislike, I for one will bring back from the forest,
my brother, who is a faultless man and a beloved man of his people."


"Bringing back Rama with a very firm mind, I will become a servant to him, who is
radiant with glory."


Speaking as aforesaid, the high soled Bharata, pricking her with a multitude of
unpleasant words, roared again like a lion stationed in a mountain cave.

undefined

undefined

undefined


The people devoted to the high- soled Rama of unfailing bravery accompanied him on
his way to the forest for exile.


When the king was forced (in the interests of his son) to turn back, the group of
friends who were following Rama's chariot did not return.


Rama who enjoyed great celebrity and who was richly endowed with every virtue,
resembling the full moon, had indeed become the favorite for the people living in Ayodhya.


Despite the entreaties of the people of his own, Rama(the scion of the Kakutstha),
in order to honor his father's vow; proceeded towards the forest.


Fondly gazing on the people as though drinking with his eyes, Rama lovingly spoke
(as follows) as though they were his own children:


"The respect and affection that has been bestowed upon me by you (the residents of
Ayodhya) may for my satisfaction be bestowed in a special measure on Bharata.


"Bharata who enhances the delight of Kaikeyi and who possesses excellent conduct,
will indeed do pleasing and beneficial things to you appropriately."


"Bharata who is matured in knowledge but young in age, who is gentle but endowed
with virility and virtue, will become your worthy master who can dispel your fears"


"Bharata who is endowed with royal virtues is being marked as the prince. Further,
king's command is to be carried out by me and the rest of you.


"If you desire to please me, see that the king does not suffer agony when I have
gone to forest for exile"


The more Rama the son of Dasaratha, showed himself to be faithful to his duty, the
more the people wished to have him as their master "


Rama accompanied by son of Sumitra, drew the people of the city, who were weeping
piteously, after him as if tied and pulled with cords.


Those brahmanas, who were triply revered for their learning, their age and their
spirituality, their heads shaking with advanced years, cried out :


"Oh Noble Steeds, of speedy breed! You who are carrying Rama, do come back! Do not
proceed! Be friendly to your master (since by taking Rama against our wishes, you will be doing a
disservice to him)"


"Indeed all things, which are endowed with ears, more so horses, stand appraised of
our entreaty. Therefore, you return."


"That hero of the pure soul, of virtuous and auspicious firm resolve, that master,
deserves to be brought back to the city and not to be taken to the forest."


Seeing those aged brahmanas uttering those painful words, Rama quickly got down from
the chariot.


Rama with Sita and Lakshmana, taking close strides, proceeded on foot towards the
forest.


That Rama who was affectionate in his disposition and had compassion in his eyes,
could not abandon those brahmanas walking on foot, far behind the chariot.


Perceiving Rama still going towards the forest, those brahmanas perplexed in mind
and greatly distressed, spoke the following words :


"The whole of this brahmana community is following you, devoted (as you are) to the
brahmanas. See, they are bearing the sacred fires on their shoulders"


"Look at these canopies (obtained by us while observing Vajpeya sacrifice*)
accompanying our backs like clouds at the end of the rainy season"


"With these canopies of ours, we shall give shade to you, who have got no canopy and
are being scored with rays (of the sun.)"


"Oh, Dear child! The intellect of ours, which was forever engaged in perusing the
study of Vedic texts has been now made to follow the course of exile to the forest"


"We will carry the Vedas in our hearts as our excellent treasure and our wives too
will remain at home, protected by their character"


"We shall not revoke our decision. Our mind is fully determined to go along with you
(to the forest). If you do not pay attention to piety, what being will remain devoted to the path
of virtue?"


" Oh, prince of resolute conduct! We entreat you by our heads having gray hair like
the white color of the swans, that are soiled with dust as a result of their falling on the ground
(in the course of our prostration to you) (pray) turn back."


"Sacrifices have been commenced by many of those Brahmanas that have come here.
Their completion, oh dear child, depends on your return"


"Beings both animate and inanimate, Oh, Rama, are indeed devoted to you. Show
affection to those devotees, who entreat you to return."


"The trees held by their roots, unable to accompany you, seen to be weeping,
hump-backed by the force of wind"


"Birds too, which sit motionless and are unable to go out in search of food and
which remain fixed at one spot on trees, are supplicating you to return, compassionate as you are
to all created beings"


While those brahmanas were crying thus with a view to persuading Rama to return, the
river Tamasa appeared there, as though retarding the progress of Rama "


Thereafter Sumantra the charioteer too released the horses, tired as they were, from
the chariot and quickly making them roll, allowed them to graze not very far from the (bank of)
Tamasa once they had drunk water and had their body washed in the river."

undefined

undefined

undefined


When Rama, who is excellent in virtue and outstanding among those causing delight,
having left for the forest, Kausalya who was feeling pained, spoke, weeping to her husband as
follows:


"Despite the fame in the three worlds of your great glory that Dasaratha is
compassionate, bountiful and kind in his words, how your two sons along with Seetha who grew
comfortably can bear suffering in the forest when faced with hardships, O the best among the
foremost of men!"


"That Seetha, who is a young lady in the prime of her youth and very delicate, can
really tolerate heat and cold?"


"How the large-eyed Seetha can eat a food prepared with wild rice, she having eaten
here a good food containing soups and snacks?"


"How that irreproachable Seetha can hear the horrid sounds of cruel animals and
lions, after hearing the auspicious sounds of singing and music here?"


Where Rama the mighty hero, resplendent as Mahendra's standard and the mighty armed
is sleeping indeed with his arm as a pillow?"


"When can I see the face of Rama with the colour of a lotus, framed with marvelous
locks of lotus-perfume, with eyes resembling lotus-petals and excellent?"


There is no doubt that my heart is fully made of the solid-interior of a diamond,
for which reason this heart is not shattered into a thousand pieces, even in my not seeing of that
Rama."


"It was not a kindly act by you that you banished my kith and kin, who were worthy
of comforts to wander around in the forest in such a miserable condition."


"Even if Rama comes back in the fifteenth year, it cannot be inferred that Bharata
will abandon the kingdom and the treasury."


"There are those who in a ceremony in hour of dead relatives, first feed their
relatives and thereafter, to fulfill their duty, remember to invite the illustrious Twice-born.


"The virtuous and the learned Brahmins, who are like unto gods, do not accept
afterwards even food as delicious as ambrosia."


"The best of Brahmins in their wisdom, will not accept what remains of the food of
which other Brahmins have partaken, regarding it as a bull shorn of its horns."


"O, king! Why not the eldest and the best brother refuse to accept the kingdom
enjoyed by the younger brother?"


"A tiger does not wish to share a part of food eaten by another animal. In the same
manner, Rama the tiger among men may not accept that which has been enjoyed by another."


"Oblations, clarified butter, leavings of an offering, sacred grass and sacrificial
posts made of trunk of Khadira tree, once used, are not put to use again in a sacrifice."


"Thus, Rama cannot accept the kingdom taken away by other, as those not accepting an
ambrosia whose essence has been taken away or as in a sacrifice, stalks of Soma plant (from which a
beverage called Soma is prepared) are lost."


"Rama will not go through such a type of dishonour, as a strong tiger does not
endure even touching of its tail."


"Even if all the worlds combine together in a great battle, they cannot stir up fear
in him. The virtuous minded Rama will provide righteousness to the people with
unrighteousness."


"Rama with great prowess and with his mighty arms can surely burn up all beings and
even the ocean itself by his golden arrows; like at the time of destruction of the world."


"That excellent man with such a lion's strength and with eyes like those of a bull
was ruined indeed by his own father, like killing its child-fish by an adult fish."


"A son, who is devoted to righteousness, has been sent to exile by you. Is it a
right thing for you, as seen by scriptures or is it an eternal conduct as practiced by the Twice
born?"


"O, king! A husband is a chief refuge for a woman. Her second refuge is a son. The
third refuge is her near-relative. There is no fourth one here."


"Among those three refuges, you do not indeed exist. Rama on his part took refuge in
a forest and I do not wish to go there. Thus, I have been ruined in all ways, by you."


"This kingdom along with neighboring states has been ruined by you. You yourself
along with ministers have been ruined. I along with my son are ruined. Citizens too are ruined.
Your son Bharata and your wife Kaikeyi only are delighted."


Hearing the aforesaid voice of Kausalya, consisting of her cruel words, the king
also being distressed, became disillusioned. Thereafter, the king then looking back on his own evil
act, was entangled in grief

undefined

undefined

undefined

Afterwards ,the self composed Rama by controlling his thoughts with courage ,approached 
the kind -hearted and affectionate brother Lakshmana who was distressed with agony who was very much 
angry like a hissing king cobra ,with his eyes dilated with wrath and spoke the following words.

" Hold back grief and anger. Forget this insult, by taking refuge in courage alone. Obtain 
great joy! Abandon all these arrangements made today for my coronation and immediately take up action 
that is faultless ."

"Oh, Lakshmana! Show the same zeal now in terminating my coronation as the zeal shown 
earlier in preparations for my coronation."

"My mother Kaikeyi is still agonized about my coronation. Behave in such a way that no 
apprehension comes to her mind on this matter."

"Oh, Lakshmana! I do not wish to disregard the painful doubt in her mind even for a moment".

"I do not remember to have done even a small disagreeable thing here at any time to my 
mothers or to my father, either intentionally or unintentionally."

"Let the promise made by my father ,who is truthful, who is truly mighty and who is afraid 
of the fear of the other world, become true .Let him be fearless."

"Our father will feel anguished that his word has not come true ,if this coronation is 
not withdrawn. His distress will cause pain to me."

"Oh, Lakshmana for that reason, I wish to go to forest immediately from her, by withdrawing, 
coronation arrangement."

"Soon after my departure to the forest now, Kaikeyi having accomplished her purpose, 
will coolly get her son coronated."

"If go to forest , wearing deer -skin rags and with my hair twisted together Kaikeyi 
will have mental peace."

"I do not want to create trouble to my father, who has taken this hard decision in his 
mind . Hence, I will go to the forest at once

"Oh, Lakshmana! Look at it as destiny which has taken back kingdom given to me and which 
is sending me to exile"

-"If not making of destiny to create such a thought in Kaikeyi, how come she resolved 
to harass?"

"You know that I had no discrimination among mothers and Kaikeyi also in the past had 
no discrimination between me and her son Bharata"

"I do not perceive any other reason than an accident that made Kaikeyi to abolish my 
coronation , to send me to exile ,and to speak ferocious words ,not to be talked about."

"If it is for not an accidental reason, how Kaikeyi who is of a perfect temperament and 
who is born in a royal family can tell like a common woman to her husband to create trouble for me ?"

"The influence of destiny is un imaginable. No living being can counteract its influence. 
An adverse fate has befallen on me and on her .It is clear now ."

"Oh, Lakshmana! There is no means whatsoever to abstain from it otherwise than to follow 
the course of destiny. Who will be able to fight against the destiny. ?"

"Pleasure and pain, fear and anger, gain and loss, birth and death and such other things 
are all the acts of destiny"

"Even sages, who performed sever penance, having been harassed by destiny leave aside 
restraint and get ruined by lust and anger."

"It is indeed an act of destiny which suddenly and unimaginably obstructs an action, 
undertaken in the world ,at the starting point itself."

"Although my coronation is obstructed, I have no grief since I have restrained the self 
by myself with real consciousness."

"Hence ,you also ,like me, get the arrangements for coronation withdrawn immediately 
without any anguish"

Oh, Lakshmana! Let all these very pots of water arranged for coronation be used by me 
for my bath after completing the religious vow of asceticism."

"Otherwise ,why to me this water in these pots ,which is royal property? The water drawn 
out by myself ,will be used for my bath after completing the religious vow."

"Oh, Lakshmana! Do not repent about this perverseness of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. 
When you talk of kingdom or dwelling in the forest, this is the final beautitude."

"Oh, Lakshmana! Do not suspect our mother for obstruction of coronation ceremony. She 
is uttering evil words, being overpowered by destiny. You are aware of this destiny, which has such 
influence."

undefined

undefined

undefined


While Rama, the best of men was leaving, after offering salutation to his father,
women in the palace were weaping loudly.


Which Rama, without being told by his father, used to do necessary activities and
protect the entire palace, is about to go to exile now".


"Rama, since he was born, was showing the same attention to us, as he was showing to
his mother Kausalya."


"He used to avoid actions which created anger and soothed all those who were angry.
Rama was not furious with those who abused him. Such Rama is going today to exile."


"Our stupid king by abandoning Rama who was helpful to all beings , is offending all
the beings."


Thus, all the king consorts while weaping loudly, as cows which lost their Calves,
abused their husband .


After hearing the terrific distressful crying sounds in the palace, Dasaratha clung
to the seat, with extreme anguish for his son.


Rama, who was greatly hurt, sighed like an elephant, subdued his senses and went to
his mother's palace along with Lakshmana


Rama saw a much worshipped old man sitting at the gateway of the house and many
other standing there.


After seeing Rama, all of them rose quickly and greeted Rama the most triumphant
man, by uttering the words "May you have increased success!"


Rama crossed the first gate and saw old Brahmanas who were perfect in Vedas and duly
honoured by the king.


Rama offered salutation to those brahmanas and saw old women and girls, guarding the
gate in the third enclosure.


Then those women, having been delighted, greeted Rama with good word of success,
quickly entered the house and informed Kausalya about the lovely arrival of Rama .


At that time, Kausalya having spent the whole night with steadfastness, who
performing worship to Vishnu,at dawn, for the welfare of her son.


Kausalya, who was interested to practise religious vows regularly was appearing
auspiciously by wearing a white silk sari and gladly performing sacrificial ceremony in a sacred
fire, by reciting vedic hymns.


Then Rama entered the auspicious mother's apartment and saw his mother performing
sacrificial ceremony in sacred fire there.


There, Rama saw the articles of worship kept ready for the purpose of the sacred
ceremony like curd, unbroken rice, clarified butter, sweet meats, things fit for oblation, fried
grain, garlands made of white flowers, rice boiled in milk, mixture of rice and peas with a few
spices, sacrificial sticks, vessels full of water etc.


Kausalya, who became lean because of observance of vows, was shining like an angel
with her white silk sari and was satiating gods by presenting to them libations by water.


By seeing her son who came after a long time and who gave delight to mother,
Kausalya was pleased and approached towards him, like a female horse approaching her young
colt.


Rama offered salutation to the approaching mother by touching her feet. Then, she
took him into her arms and smelt his head.


Kausalya spoke these pleasing words affectionately to her son Rama, who was
unassailable by enemies.


"Obtain long life and glory, as obtained by the aged , the virtuous, the great
souled and the royal sages .Protect the righteousness engrained in your race"


"Oh,Rama ! King Dasaratha ,your father is a man of true promise. Today itself, you
will be installed as successor to the kingdom by your virtuous father."


Kausalya asked Rama to take food , but Rama just touched the seat offered by her and
after performing salutation to her, spoke thus to his mother.


That Rama , being humble in nature , became still modest due to respect for his
mother and was set about to ask her permission before setting forth his journey to Dandaka
forest.


"Oh,mother! You do not know that a great dismay is approaching now. It brings grief
to you, to Sita and to Lakshmana"


"I am going to Dandaka forest. Why this seat for me? Time has come for me to sit on
a seat made of Kusha grass."


"I shall live in a solitary forest like a sage for fourteen years, leaving off meat
and living with roots, fruits and honey".


"The great king is giving to Bharata the succession to kingdom and to me, however,
he is making me a sage to stay in the forest of Dandaka."


"I have to satisfy with the things existing in the forest and subsist with roots and
fruits in a solitary forest for fourteen years."


The queen Kausalya fell on the floor all at once like the branch of a tree, cut down
by an axe and as an angel dropping down from heaven.


Seeing Kausalya who was fit to be free from sorrow, Rama lifted up her, who had
fallen unconsciously on the floor like a plantain tree.


Rama touched with his hand that miserable Kausalya,whose limbs were covered with
fragrant powder and who rose like a loaded horse from the floor on which it rolled from side to
side.


Kausalya, who was fit for happiness but was afflicted with grief, spoke thus to Rama
the best of men who was sitting nearby, while Lakshmana was hearing.


"Oh, Rama! I would not have felt this much grief if I were childless .You are born
only to produce sorrow to me."


"Oh, son! There is no other grief to a barren woman except the only worry that "I
have no sons".


"Oh, Rama! I have not seen any happiness or prosperity earlier, while my husband is
in power. I believed that I could see them at last when my son comes to power."


"I have to hear so many disagreeable words from my fellow-wives who are inferior to
me and who pierce my heart with their words though I am a better and virtuous wife among them."


"Which one will be more sorrowful to women than this unending and consuming grief
that occurred to me now?"


"Even when you are near by, I am being rejected. What to tell after you leave for
exile? Death indeed is certain to me."


"My husband always held me down, without giving me any independence and treat me
equal to or even lower than the servants of Kaikeyi"


Those who serve me now and those who follow me, will not speak to me, after seeing
Bharata".


Oh, son! How can I, the miserable one, see the face of Kaikeyi who talks hurtingly
because of her continuous anger."


"Oh,Rama! I have been waiting for seventeen years after your second birth of thread
ceremony, with the hope that my troubles will disappear at one time or the other."


Oh, Rama! In this old age, I cannot bear insult from co-wives and this unending
sorrow for a long time.


"How can I the pitiable one, spend this miserable life without seeing your face
radiating like full moon."


"You were nourished in vain by me ,the important one by fasts, by meditations, by
various difficult and painful vows ."


"My heart is not breached, as bank of a great river, struck by new water in monsoon,
by hearing this news.That is why, I feel it is strong."


"There is no death to me, indeed .I have no place in the abode of god yama who
presides over the spirits of the dead .That is why, Yama is not forcingly carrying me off like a
lion carrying off a wailing antelope."


"This grief is inserted into my body. Even then, my heart is stable. It has not
broken into pieces and fallen on the floor .It is indeed made of iron. There is no untimely death,
it is certain"


"I feel bad since all my religious vows, charities, restraints have all gone
waste.The austerity I performed for the sake of of -spring has gone in vain, as a seed sown in a
saline soil."


"If a man in great distress can get premature death out of his own will, I being
separated from you ,would have attain the glory of the dead now itself like cow without the
calf."


"Moreover, what is the use of life? Oh, Rama! With your brilliant face shining like
moon! My life is useless without you. I shall accompany you to the forest like a weak cow going
behind it's calf"


Then, that Kausalya looked at Rama to whom a great calamity has occurred, saw her
son bound by grief and lamented very much in various ways like a kinnara woman.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Manthara, a housemaid who was residing with Kaikeyi since her birth, accidentally
ascended the balcony of Kaikeyi's white palace, which resembled the full moon.


Manthara, from that balcony, saw the entire city of Ayodhya, with all its principal
roads being sprinkled with water and strewn with heaps of flowers.


Manthara further saw from that balcony the city decorated with the best of flags and
banners. The roads were cleared for uninterrupted traffic. All the people took head-bath. Brahmans
with flowers and sweets in their hands were chanting Mantras. The gateways of temples were white
washed. There were sounds of all musical instruments. The city was filled with rejoicing people and
resounding chant of Vedas. The elephants and horses were also merry. The bulls were making roaring
noise. The highly delighted citizens hoisted rows of flags on their housetops.


Manthara asked a house maid with bright pleasing eyes and wearing white silk clothes
standing nearby, as follows: -


"Why is Kausalya giving away money to people so delightfully today in charity,
eventhough she is badly lured of money?"


"Why are people so happy today? Is the king duly pleased with something, doing any
great act? Tell me."


That housemaid, bursting with joy, told Manthara in a great gladdening tone about
the great honor to be conferred upon Rama.


"Tomorrow on the day of Pushyami star, king Dasaratha is going to anoint the
fault-less Rama for the princely kingdom."


After hearing the words of that maid, Manthara quickly with wrath walked down from
the roof of the palace, which was in the shape of mount Kailasa.


Manthara of sinful thought; burning with anger, approached Kaikeyi who was lying on
a bed and spoke these words:


"O, fool! Get up. Why are you sleeping? A dreadful situation is befalling you. A
flood of troubles submerges you. Why are you not knowing this yourself?"


"Oh, Kaikeyi ! You appear to be a beloved wife for your husband, but in reality he
does not like you. You boast of your fortune. Like the flow of a stream in summer; your fortune is
unsteady".


Kaikeyi was very much worried after hearing hard words spoken with anger by Manthara
of sinful thoughts.


Kaikeyi asked the hunch-backed Manthara as follows; "O, Manthara! Are you not safe?
You appear to be very sorrowful with your worried face".


After hearing Kaikeyi's sweet words, Manthara who was an expert in talking, spoke
with anger.


That Manthara, who was full of cunning, feigning to be seeking Kaikeyi's welfare,
appeared more worried, and making Kaikeyi sorrowful, spoke the following, to create hostility
between Rama and Kaikeyi.


"Oh, queen! An unending great ruin has encircled you. King Dasaratha is going to
anoint Rama for the princely kingdom".


"I am immersed in a bottomless pit of fear. I am in distress and my mind is burning
as if by fire. I hastened here to seek you out."


"Kaikeyi! If Rama becomes king, his son will become king after him. Thus, Bharata's
name itself will be removed from the royal clan."


"Oh, Kaikeyi! Having born in a royal family and being an emperor's wife, how is it
that you are not knowing about the cruelty in kingly duties?"


"Your husband talks about righteousness, but does harm secretly. He says sweet words
but behaves cruelly. Because of your clean thinking; you are not able to know that he is cheating
you thus."


"Your husband approaches you and talks good words, which are useless. But he passes
on benefit today to Kausalya only."


"The evil minded Dasaratha sent Bharata to the house of his relatives and at dawn,
is going to install Rama on the throne without hindrance."


"O, childish one! Like a mother, you wish for his well being. But he is an enemy,
and is called husband for a namesake. He is like a poisonous serpent in your bosom."


"King Dasaratha has acted towards you and your son today in the same way as an enemy
or a serpent would behave if ignored."


"O, stupid one! With his untruthful sweet words to you, who are ever deserving of
ease, the evil minded king is installing Rama on the throne and is thus ruining you along with your
son."


"O, Kaikeyi, of amazing beauty! You have to take timely action immediately, so as to
save yourself, your son and me too."


Hearing Manthara's words, that Kaikeyi of charming countenance who was lying in bed,
rose from her coach full of delight like unto the crescent moon in autumn.


That Kaikeyi in the midst of her astonishment and joy gave a graceful jewel to the
hunch-backed Manthara.


Kaikeyi, the best among women, gave a jewel to Manthara and spoke to her as
follows:


"Oh, Manthara! You informed much gladdening news to me. What else can I do for you,
who informed such a good news?"


"I do not see any difference between Rama and Bharata. That is why, I am happy that
Rama is being anointed for crown by the king."


"O, Manthara! You do merit every favor. I have no other pleasant news than this.
Hence, you cannot ever again inform a better loving news than this. I shall give you a good boon.
Ask for it!"

undefined

undefined

undefined


"Rama having departed to the forest, horses on the return path however, shedding
warm tears, did not proceed further on the way."


"I, on my part, offering salutation with joined palms to both the princes and
keeping back from that grief, ascended the chariot and moved on."


"With the hope that I shall be called again by Rama, I stayed there along with Guha
for three days."


"Oh, emperor! Even trees in your domain have withered, without giving flowers
sprouts and buds, having emaciated due to Rama's separation."


"Rivers, pools and lakes were with hot water. Groves and gardens were with their
leaves, parched up."


"Living beings are not moving. Wild animals too are not roaming around. That forest
became silent, predominated by grief towards Rama."


"Oh, emperor! Lotus-lakes were with lotus-leaves hiding under water pressing
themselves closely together, with muddy waters, with parched lotus-flowers and in which fish and
water fowls have completely disappeared."


"Water-born flowers and flowers living on dry lands now give very little fragrance
and fruits do not have a luscious look as before."


"Oh, best of men! The gardens here are empty of men and the birds have vanished. I
am not seeing the gardens as charming (as before)."


"Nobody greeted me, entering into Ayodhya City. Having not seen Rama, the people are
breathing their sigh of lamentation again and again."


"Oh, emperor! Seeing the royal chariot returning here without Rama, all the people
along the royal high-way are shedding tears with grief."


"Seeing the returned chariot, women from mansions, seven-storied buildings and royal
palaces are crying ha ha!', being troubled by the non-appearance of Rama."


"Women, being more sorrowful, are looking at each other indistinctly with their long
bright eyes overwhelmed with a flood of tears."


"I do not see any distinction in their agony, whether they are non-friends, friends
or neutral people."


"Oh, emperor! The city of Ayodhya with its joy-less people, with its elephants and
horses looking miserable, with sighing exhaustion due to cries of pain, filled with sounds of
moaning, cheerless and feeling anguish due to Rama's exile, appears to me, like Queen Kausalya
without her son."


Hearing Sumantra's words, the king in a voice choked with tears and very much
woeful, spoke to that charioteer as follows:


"Enjoined by Kaikeyi with her sinful birth and intention, I could not deliberate
with people experienced in counsel or with elders beforehand."


"This act has been done by me in haste due to infatuation for the sake of a woman,
without consulting with friends or ministers or with interpreters of sacred texts."


"Oh, Sumantra! This great calamity, surely, has come as an inevitable consequence or
for the ruin of this race or accidentally."


Oh, sumantra! If at all I have done any favour to you, lead me fast to Rama. My
vital spirits are hastening me."


"If there is the same unlimited authority of mine even now, let Rama be brought back
to Ayodhya. I cannot survive without Rama even for a moment."


"Or perhaps Rama the mighty-armed might have gone a long way. Make me to ascend the
chariot and quickly show me to Rama."


"Where is that Rama having pearl-like teeth and wearing a large bow? If only I can
see him well with Seetha, I can survive."


"If I cannot see Rama having red eyes, mighty arms and with ear-rings made of gems,
I shall proceed to the world of Death."


"What is more distressing to me after getting into this condition, in not seeing
here, Rama who is a delight to Ikshvaku dynasty?"


"Oh, Rama! Oh, Younger Brother of Rama! Oh, unfortunate Seetha! You do not know that
I am dying with grief, like one abandoned."


King Dasaratha, his mind very much despaired with grief and plunged in an ocean of
sorrow, very difficult to be crossed, spoke (as follows)


"Oh, Queen Kausalya! I am plunged in this ocean of grief. Its area of sorrow is for
Rama. its other shore is Seetha's separation. Its waves and huge whirlpools are sighs of anguish.
It is agitated with water and foam as tears. Throwing away of arms is the swarm of fishes. Its
great sounds are cries of lamentation. The scattered hari is its duck-week. Kaikeyi is its
submarine fire. Which is the cause for the rush in my tears. The words of the hum-backed are its
huge crocodiles. Its shores are the boons asked by the cruel Kaikeyi. Its long stretch is due to
sending of Rama to far away place. I cannot cross this ocean alive, without Rama. What a pity!"


"Though I want to see Rama and Lakshmana now, I am not able to see them here. It is
very bad." - thus lamenting, the king of great renown soon became unconscious and fell down on his
couch.


Hearing his words lamenting as much as twice more pitiably for Rama and the king
having fallen unconscious, Kausalya was alarmed once again.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Seeing him firm minded in protecting the command of his father, Kausalya in a choked
voice spoke these righteous words:


Rama who is born in me and Dasaratha, is a righteous person. He speaks lovingly to
all beings. He has not faced grief at any time. How can such a person live in a forest, by
gathering grains ?'


"While the dependants and the servants of Lord Rama eat pleasant foods all the
while, how can he eat roots and fruits himself in the forest ?"


"Hearing that Rama the beloved and virtuous is being thus sent to exile by the king
, who will believe these words? Who will not develop fear ?"


Oh, Rama ! If you , the charming in the world are to go to exile , then it can be
certainly said that everything is ordered by a strong destiny'


"Oh, Son! Soon after your departure to a distant forest, a great and incomparable
fire of sorrow will generate in my whole body. The wind which flares it up is your not being seen
here. My lamentation and grief are the fire-sticks. My wailing tears will be the offerings as an
oblation to fire. The choking and anxiety will be a great smoke .The thought that when you would
return, will generate smoke again. Such a fire of grief will make me emaciated completely and will
burn like dry wood by fire in winter.'


"Oh, Son! A cow follows its calf wherever it goes. So also, I shall come with you
wherever you go."'


"Oh, son! A cow follows its calf wherever it goes. So also, I shall come with you wherever you go."


"Kaikeyi already deceived the king .He will not be alive, when I leave for the
forest and you also leave him .It is certain."


"To a woman, abandonment of husband is entirely a cruel act. That bad act is not to
be perceived even by mind."


"Till Dasaratha, my father and the great king is alive, you should serve him well.
It is eternal justice."


After Rama spoke thus, Kausalya with auspicious appearance, was very much pleased
and spoke to Rama, who performs indefatigable actions, in consent.


That Rama, the best among upholders of righteousness, after hearing the words of his
mother ,spoke again to her who was very much distressed.


"The words of father are to be followed by you and me. For all, he is the king, the
nourished, a venerable man, the best among men, the lord and the ruler."


"After roaming in the great forest for fourteen years, I shall come back and very
gladly stand by your command."


After hearing the words of Rama, Kausalya who was affectionate to her son , was in
great sorrow with her face filled with tears and spoke thus to her beloved son Rama .


"Oh, Rama! I can not reside in the middle of these step-wives. If you have made up
your mind to go to forest as per your father's wish ,also take me, like taking a female deer of the
forest ,to the woods ''


"Rama spoke thus these words bemoaningly to her, who was weeping= "as long as a
woman is alive ,her husband is god and master to her".


"King Dasaratha, supreme commander has authority over you and me also now. when
king, the lord of the earth and the wise man is there , we are not indeed master-less.'


"Bharata also, who is a righteous person and who speaks lovingly to all beings will
be obliging to you. He is indeed always devoted to righteousness.'


"While I take leave, take care of the king attentively so that he will not get
fatigued even a little with grief over his son."


"Act always soothingly for a well-being of the aged king, seeing that his terrible
grief will not destroy him ."


Even if a woman is interested in religious vows and fastings in addition to being
the best of the excellent ;if she does not obey her husband she will become ill-fated !''


Even if a woman does not offer salutation to celestials and does not worship the
gods, she will attain the highest heaven by service to her husband ."


She has to do service, truly devoted in love and welfare of her husband. This is
seen in the world from the beginning, was heard from ancient texts and mentioned as
righteousness.'


Oh, Mother! You always worship gods by sacrificial fire and by flowers for my sake .
Brahmanas also with right voes are to be worshipped .'


"Look forward for the time of my return in such a manner with restraint, being
temperate in food and being devoted in the service of your husband."


"After my return, your best desire will be fulfilled if our father the best among
protectors of righteousness ,is still alive till then."


Kausalya who was afflicted with grief over her son, was with eyes full of tears
after hearing Rama's utterances and spoke thus to Rama.


"Oh, Brave son! I am not able to avert your well-made resolution, in the matter of
your going to forest. Time is inscrutable .It is certain."


"Oh, son! You go undisturbed. Let there be auspiciousness always to you .I shall
become refreshed, when you return again."


"You, the illustrious after accomplishing a purpose, having observed a vow and
having attained freedom from debt to your father, after having come again, I shall get great
happiness".


"The path of the destiny, which extinguishes my words and impels you to go to the
forest ,is ever not imaginable on this earth"


"Oh, Rama the valiant !Go just now and come again safely, when you will rejoice me
with your pleasing and tranquillising words ."


"How good it will be, if today itself is the day of your returning from the forest,
wearing twisted hair and garment made of bark."


"The queen kausalya thus saw Rama who decided to go to forest .She spoke these words
with most excellent mind to Rama having auspicious qualities, being desirous of averting evil by
recitation of auspicious words."

undefined

undefined

undefined


The prince Rama, having been invoked blessings by his mother, after having
salutation to Kausalya and remaining firmly in his virtuous path, set out journey to the forest.
Entering to the road filled with people, he made it shine with his splendour and stirred the hearts
of the people because of his excellent qualities.


Sita, practising for the coronation ceremony, did not hear anything on that matter.
She was thinking of installation of Rama alone as prince Regent in her heart


As she knows what is to be done and is aware of rules relating to kings Sita herself
being rejoiced in heart, performed the worship of the gods and was waiting for the prince.


Thereafter Rama, slightly turning his face down , entered his own house which is
well decorated and is filled with rejoicing people all around


Sita sprang up from her seat and trembled by seeing her husband stricken with
sorrow, his mind perturbed with anxiety.


By seeing her, Rama the virtuous man could not contain that grief existing in his
mind and hence got unveiled.


Seeing him pale-faced, perspired and without endurance, Sita (stricken with grief)
spoke thus what is this now , my Lord!


Oh , Rama! It is indeed told by learned brahmanas that today's constellation Pushya
(which is presided by sage bR^ihaspati) which is propitions, is suitable (for coronation). Why are
you sadly disposed?


Your handsome face does not shine splendidly as it should when covered by an
umbrella white as water-froth and provided with a hundred ribs.


Nor your lotus -eyed face is not being fanned (as it should ) by superior chowries
shining like a moon and a swan


Nor the overjoyed and eloquent bards Sutas and Maagadhas (who sing portions of epic
poems and ancient ballads ) are seen here , praising you with auspicious words .


Nor brahmanas who are well-versed in Vedas, have not placed , as per prescribed
Rites , honey and curds on your head after you had taken the head -bath


All ministers, chiefs of Associations, citizens and country-folk, duly decked with
ornaments, are not inclined to go along with you.


Why the main carriage used for travelling and pleasure, tied with four horses decked
with gold ornaments and with excellent speed does not go ahead of you ?


Oh, valiant prince! A glorious elephant which is worshipped for its good
characteristics, resembling a mountain crowned with a dark cloud is not seen ahead in your
journey.


Oh, brave man pleasant with the sight! I do not see marching before you an elephant
having been placed in front with an excellent seat embroidered in gold meant for you


While coronation is getting ready now, the colour of your face is appearing strange.
Even happiness is not being seen (in you). Why is it?


Rama spoke thus to Sita, who is lamenting : Oh, Sita! My venerable father is sending
me to a forest in exile.


Oh, Sita ! You are born in a great family. You know what is Right and practise
virtue . hear me in what sequence it happened to me


Two great boons were given to my mother Kaikeyi long ago , by my father Dasaratha
who is true to a promise.


Now that the arrangements initiated by the king for my coronation are getting ready
, Kaikeyi came out with that promise of boons, turning the situation to her own advantage by
grounds of morality


I have to dwell in Dandaka forest for fourteen years .Bharata is being appointed as
prince by my father


Before setting forth to the lonely forest, I came to see you. I should not be
praised at any time in the presence of Bharata . Men endowed with power and fortune indeed do not
tolerate praise of others . Therefore, my virtues should not be extolled by you in front of
Bharata.


You need not be attended in a special manner at any time by him. You can stay
familiar to him, by behaving with him conformably.


The princely kingdom is given to him by the king permanently. Oh, Sita ! He is fit
to be rendered gracious by you, more so the king Dasaratha


Keeping up the pledge of my father, today itself. Oh, Sita of magnanimous mind!
Remain firm.


Oh, Sita the good and faultless lady ! After I leave for the forest frequented by
the sages, you can become interested in religious vows and fastings.


You can rise up in dawn , perform worship of the deities as per precept and do
salutation to my father , king Dasaratha.


Keeping in front of righteousness alone, you have to respect the aged Kausalya, my
mother who is getting emaciated by grief.


For me all my mothers are equal in my eyes in point if fondness, love and the way in
which they have looked after me ( in my childhood). Hence the rest of mothers also deserve to be
saluted always by you


You, in particular, should regard Bharata and Satrughna, as your brothers or
sons.


Bharata is indeed king and the master both for the kingdom and for our family .
Hence, you should not do what is displeasing to him at any time.


Kings being pleased by good character and served by exerting one's self become
happy. They get angry if it is to the contrary


Kings abandon even their own sons, if they are antagonistic and accept even other
people if they are fitting


Oh good lady ! You such dwell here, doing conformably to the will of Bharata the
king, remaining devoted to righteousness and with a vow of truth as you end.


Oh, my dear Sita ! I can go to the great forest. You can stay here only, without
doing harm to any one as it is .Listen to my words

undefined

undefined

undefined


Lakshmana who came there earlier, heard the conversation of Seetha and Rama, having
his eyes glut with tears, being unable to bear the anguish, tightly pressed the feet of his bother
and spoke (as floows) to Rama who was performing a great vow and to Seetha who enjoyed great
honour.


"If you decided to go to the forest filled with antelopes and elephants, I, in front
wearingthe bow, shall accompany you to the forest."


"Together with me, you will travel in the various forests, resonant with sounds of
birds and herds of wild animals."


"Without you, I do not want ascendency to heaven now do I desire immortality now do
I wish for sovereignity over the globes."


Lakshmana who was speaking in favour of coming to the forst, was forbidden by Rama
through many of his pacifying words. After hearing them, Lakshmana again soke as follows:


"I was indeed permitted by you earlier. How is it that you are prohibiting me
now?"


"Oh, the faultless man! I desire to know the reason for prohibiting me, who is
indeed willing to come to the forest, because there is doubt in my mind."


Thereafter Rama of great splendour spoke to Lakshmana the valiant man who was
standing in front, intending to preceede Sri Rama and soliciting with joined palms.


"You are so friendly, interested in righteousness, valiant, abiding always in a good
path, dear to me as life, obedient, my brother and a companion."


"Oh Lakshmana! If you proceed to the forest along with me now, who will support
Kausalya or the illustrious Sumitra?"


"That emperor of great splendour, who used to shower blessings on the people as a
cloud sends down rain on the earth, stands circumscribed by cord of love."


"That Kaikeyi daughter of king Aswapathi, after obtaining this kingdom, will
certainly not accord good treatment to her step-wives, who are at grief."


"Bharata on acquiring the kingdom will be devoted to Kaikeyi and will not think of
sorrowful Kausalya or Sumitra."


"Oh, Lakshmana! You stay here and support the venerable Kausalya through your own
self or by obtaining favour through the king. Do this thing, as said."


"Oh, Lakshmana the knower of righteousness! Thus, your devotion towards me will have
been fully demonstrated by you. By honouring the elders, a great unqualled religious merit will
accrue to you."


"Oh, Lakshmana, the exhilarator of Raghu dynasty! Do this for my sake. There will be
no happiness to our mother, if she is left behind by us."


Lakshmana who is intelligent in speech, after hearing Rama's words, replied in a
gentle voice to him who is skilled in speech.


"Oh, Rama the valiant! Bharata being inspired by your splendour of morality will
respect Kausalya and Sumitra. There is no doubt in this matter."


"Kausalya obtained (by grant) thousand villages , which are dependent on her. Hence,
that venerable Kausalya can maintain even thousand people like me."


"The illustrious Kausalya is competent not only to maintain herself but also my
mother and people like me in addition."


"Make me your attendant. In this, there is no unrighteousness. Besides, I will be
accomplishing my object. Your purpose also will be fulfilled."


"Taking my bow and arrows and carrying a spade and a basket, I will walk in front of
you showing the path."


"I will procure for you for all time the tubers, fruits and other things which are
good food stuffs available in the forest for sages."


"You along with Seetha enjoy yourself on mountain-ridges. I shall do everything
while you are waking or sleeping."


Rama, very much delighted of hearing these words, said to him: "Oh, Lakshmana! Go,
take leave of all your friends."


"Oh, Lakshma! At a grand sacrifice perfomed by Janaka, the great-souled Varuna(god
of water) personally gave heavently bows which are dreadful to look at, divine impenetrable pices
of armour, quivers containing an inexhanstible stock of arms, two swords decked with gold and with
spotless lustre like that of a sun - all these were kept at the residence of our receptor Vasista,
after paying due reverence. Take all those arms and return soon."


Lakshmana, who was assured of his sojourn in the forest, after bidding good bye ot
his friends, approached Vasista the preceptor of Ikshvaku dynasty and took the excellent
armoury.


Lakshmana, a tiger among princes, showed to Rama all those arms, which were divine,
being worshipped and decorated by garlands.


Rama, who had fully controlled his mind, affectionately spoke as follows to
Lakshmana who arrived: "Oh, Lakshmana, the excellent man! You came in time as desired by me."


"Lakshmana, the chastiser of foes! along with you, I want to give all this wealth
pertaining to me to brahmanas, practising ansterities."


"I also desire to give to those excellent brahmanas residing here as strong devotees
to their proceptors and to all my dependents."


"You bring boon the venerable Suyagna, the son of Vasista, the best. After adoring
all other brahmanas also who are cultured, I will go to the forest."


Thus completes 31st chapter in the Ayodhya kanda of the glorious Ramayayana of
Valmiki, the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Sumitra, who was devoted to righteousness spoke the following words, which were
virtuous, to the celebrated Kausalya, the foremost among women, who had been wailing as
aforesaid


"That son of yours, oh the venerable one, is endowed with excellent virtues and is
the foremost among men. What is the use in your lamenting in this way or in weeping piteously?"


"Oh, noble lady! Your son is having mighty strength. He proved his high- soled
father perfectly truthful by renouncing his throne. He stood firmly in righteousness, which is
always practiced perfectly by disciples and which gives fruits even after death. That Rama, the
most excellent man, never deserves to be lamented."


"Lakshmana, the faultless man and the compassionate man towards all beings, always
renders the best form of service to Rama. His conduct is beneficial to the high-soled Rama."


Sita, who was habituated to comforts, even after knowing the pain whatsoever, is
accompanying your virtuous- soled son."


"What has not been secured by your capable son, who is rich in virtue and is
engrossed in the vow of truthfulness, and the banner of whose fame flutters though out the
world?"


"Having known the purity and magnanimity of Rama , the sun assuredly will not be
able to torment Rama's body with his rays."


"Auspicious and delightful breeze of moderate heat and cold, blowing from woods at
all times , will render service to Rama"


"Gently touching with its cool rays when he is reposing at night and embracing him
like a father, the moon will refresh Rama"


"Formerly, when Rama killed Subahu the son of Sambarasura the chief of demons,
Brahma being delighted , gave celestial weapons to Rama, the man with great splendor. Rama the hero
and the tiger among men, relying on the strength of his own arms, will dwell fearlessly in the
forest as if in his own palace"


"How can earth cannot be under the command of Rama, to whose aim of arrows, the
enemies fall an easy prey?"


"The splendor endowed with Rama, the valor that is in him and the beneficent
strength that resides in him lead one to believe that when he completes the term of his exile in
the forest, he will speedily regain his kingdom."


"Oh, Kausalya! Rama is the illuminator of even the sun, fire of fire, the ruler of
rules, the splendor of splendor, the foremost glory of glory, the forbearance of forbearance, the
god of gods and the foremost being of all the beings. Indeed, what handicaps are there for him in
the forest or in Ayodhya?"


"Rama the best among men will be installed on the throne soon along with the Mother
Earth (the consort of lord Vishnu), Sita the princess of Videha kingdom and Lakshmi ( the goddess
of fortune another consort of Vishnu)"


"Seeing Rama departing, all the people in Ayodhya smitten as they were with upsurge
of grief shed tears born of agony. The goddess of fortune as Sita followed the invincible hero even
as he departed for the forest, clad in a garment of the sacred Kusa grass. Indeed, what can be
difficult for him to obtain?"


"What can be difficult to obtain for, to whose front indeed walks Lakshmana himself
the best among the holders of bow wielding arrows, sword and missiles?"


"Oh, Kausalya! I tell you the truth : you can see Rama coming back, on having
completed the term of his exile in the forest . Abandon grief and infatuation."


"Oh, auspicious Kausalya, the irreproachable one! You will be able to see your son,
like the rising moon, saluting respectfully your feet, by bowing his head."


"Seeing Rama shining with great splendor appearing before you again, having been
coroneted, you will be shedding soon tears of joy from your eyes "


"Oh, Kausalya! Do not have uneasiness or grief. Rama has no ill luck. You will be
able to see soon your son along with Sita, accompanied by Lakshmana".


"Oh, the faultless queen! While people are to be consoled by you at this moment, why
are you fostering grief in your heart?"


"Oh,queen! You, whose son is Rama, ought not to grieve, for none is established in
right path in the world than Rama."


"Seeing your son saluting with his friends, you will at once begin to shed tears,
like a line of clouds in a rainy season"


"Your son the bestower of boons, will soon return to Ayodhya, and touch your feet
with his gentle but muscular hands "


"When your son the hero along with his friends salute you respectfully in adoration,
you will sprinkle tears of joy in the same way as a line of clouds pour rain on the mountain."


Sumitra the queen, skilled in her employment of words, who is faultless and
charming, thus consoled Rama's mother with various words and finally stopped speaking.


Hearing those words of Sumitra the mother of Lakshmana, the agony of Kausalya Rama's
mother and the wife of Dasaratha quickly disappeared in the same way as an autumnal cloud with a
little water in it disappears quickly.


Thus completes 44th chapter in the AyodhyaKanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Having heard all that perfectly, Bharata approached the foot of Ingudi Tree along
with his ministers and gazed on that grass-bed on which Rama had slept. Thereafter, he said to all
his mothers as follows: "It is here that the magnanimous hero laid himself for that night, his
limbs pressing the earth."


"Born of the great and segacious Dasaratha in an illustrious family, Rama verily
does not desrve to sleep on this bare earth!"


"How could Rama the tiger among men, who used to sleep on a couch horded with rich
cushions covered with superior hairy skins of antelopes, sleep on a bare floor?"


"Having ever dwelt in palaces, the upper apartments resembling the chariots of the
gods and in turrets, furnished with excellent carpets decked with heaps of flowers, perfumed with
sandal and aloes, like unto a bright and towering cloud, re-echoing to the cries of parrots,
suprassing the finest of palaces, which wre cool and fragrant with perfules, as unto Mount Meru
with its golden walls, where in that palace he was awakened at the fitting time by sogns and music
from various instruments, tinkling of ornaments and the excellent sounds of clay tomtoms, glorified
by many panegyrists, bards and ministrels throught appropriate ballads and songs of praise."


"This ( such a prince becoming like this) is unbelievable in the world and does not
appear true to me. My mind is indeed bewildered. I wish that it were a dream."


"Surely even a deity is not a little more powerful than Time (the will of god),
since that Rama, the son of Dasaratha has to sleep on the bare ground!"


"Even Seetha the daughter of the king of videha, lovely to look upon and the
cherished daughter-in-law of Dasaratha has to sleep on the floor!"


"This is the bed of my elder brother. Here are indeed the blessed marks of his
changing sides, in the form of all the blades of Kusa grass, trampled by his limbs on the hard
ground."


"I think the blessed Seetha has slept on this bed along with her jewels for, some
particles of gold appear to be stuck up, here and there."


"It is very clear that the upper garment of Seetha got entangled with these blades
here at that time. That is why, these silk-threads appear stuck to them."


"I think the bed of her husband is sweet to a woman and thought Seetha is young and
unfortunate, yet however delicate she be, she would experience no suffering."


"Alas! I am a cruel man because on my account, Rama, like an orphan, along with his
wife slept on such a bed."


"How can Rama, born in the race of monarchs, highly honoured by the entire world,
beloved of all the people, having a dark complexion as that of a blue-lotus, having red eyes,
lovely to look at who is entittled for comfort and who is not worthy of suffering, sleep on the
gound, abandoning excellent kingdom and comfort?"


"Lakshmana, having auspicious marks on his body and an exceedingly lucky man, who
accompanied his elder brother Rama in times of adversity in indeed a fortunate man."


"Seetha, who went together with her husband to the forest, is indeed an accomplished
woman. All of us, deprived of the highly virtuous Rama, are an unsettled lot."


"Dasaratha went to heaven. Rama is dwelling in the forest. this kingdom appears to
me as a boat without ahelmsman."


"Even if staying in the forest, Rama protects this earth with the power of his arms.
Hence, nobdy can think even in his mind, to invade this kingdom."


"Without guards to watch over its ramparts, with its unrestrained horses and
elephants, with its city-gates laid open, without any defenders, denuded of its happy army, plunged
in desolation in difficulties and exposed, that royal capital of Ayodhya will be shunned like
poisoned food even by the enemies."


"From today onwards, I shall sleep on the earth or on the grass, with my locks
matted, wearing robes of bark and by all means living on fruits and roots."


"For the rest of his exile, on behalf of Rama, I shall dwell cheerfully in the
forest, thereby discharging that promise so that the vows of Rama shall not have been made in
vain."


"Shatrughna will bear company with me, residing in the forest on behalf of Rama. My
elder brother, Rama along with Lakshmana will protect Ayodhya."


"Rama will be enthroned in ayodhya, by Brahmanas the Twice-born! May the gods grant
that my desire be made a reality."


"Should Rama not accept the respectful appeals made in many a way by me, I shall
follow the foot steps of Rama for any length of time he roams about in the forest thereafter. He
ought not to refuse this grace to me."

undefined

undefined

undefined


After the citizens left, Dasaratha who was efficient in taking decisions pertaining
to place and time of ceremonies, again conferred with the ministers and decided thus: "Tomorrow
will be a day when the constellation of Pushya would be in the ascendant. My son Rama, who has eyes
like red lotus, can be crowned as a prince tomorrow".


Thereafter, king Dasaratha entered the inner palace and then ordered Sumantra thus,
"Bring Rama again here".


Obeying the king's words, Sumantra went to Rama's house immediately to bring Rama
once again.


The doorkeepers informed Rama that Sumantra had come again. Hearing that, Rama was
uncertain as to the reason for Sumantra's arrival again.


Rama immediately allowed Sumantra inside and spoke these words to him: "Tell me
completely the purpose of your arrival again."


Hearing those words, Sumantra said: "King Dasaratha wants to see you. Decide
yourself in this matter whether to proceed to your father or otherwise".


Rama, after hearing Sumantra's words, started immediately and went to the royal
palace to see king Dasaratha, the Lord of people, again.


Hearing Rama to have arrived, king Dasaratha allowed him to come into the house, to
tell him an excellent and affectionate word.


The glorious Rama, soon after entering his father's house, saw his father from a
distance and fell prostrate before him in an act of submission, with his palms joined together.


Dasaratha lifted Rama up and took him into his embrace. Then, he offered a beautiful
seat to Rama and spoke to him as follows:


"Oh Rama, I have now become aged after living for a long period. I enjoyed all the
luxuries in life, as I desired. I propitiated Gods by performing hundreds of sacrifices, in which
food and lots of fees were given away to the officiating priests. "


"O Rama, the best of men! You are now born to me as without an equal on earth and as
my beloved child. I had given away lots of donations, I had performed holy rites and I have also
studied Vedas and other Holy Scriptures during my life time."


"Oh gallant Rama! I also enjoyed all the comforts, as I desired. Thus I am relieved
of all debts to the celestials (by performing holy sacrifices), to the sages (by studying Vedas
etc.), to my ancestors (by begetting you), to the Brahmans (by giving away donations and food) and
to myself (by enjoying all comforts as I desired)."


"I have no duty other than to anoint you for the crown. Hence, do what I tell
you."


"Now all the people want you to be the king. Hence, I can install you as
prince."


"Oh, Rama! It is not only the people's desire, but also these days I am getting
fearful and inauspicious dreams. Here, thunderous comets are falling with great sound, during day
time."


"Oh, Rama! Astrologers are informing me that fearful planets like Sun, Mars and Rahu
are encroaching my birth star."


"Whenever such inauspicious signs are produced, the king generally will get either
death or a fearful accident."


"Oh, Rama! Hence, before my mind gets changed, get you anointed to the crown. Are
not the minds of men unstable?"


"Today, the moon is entering the constellation known as Punarvasu which comes before
Pushyami star. The astrologers inform that the coronation ceremony can be fixed for tomorrow, when
the moon joins Pushyami star."


"Hence, get anointed for the crown on the day of Pushyami star. My mind is urging me
as it were to expedite things. O, annihilator of the enemies! I shall anoint you for the princely
kingdom tomorrow."


"That is why, with self control, you along with your wife should observe fast for
this night from now onwards, and sleep on a couch made of Kusha grass."


"Generally, there are many obstacles for such type of functions. Hence, your friends
should guard you vigilantly from all directions."


"It is my opinion that your coronation function should occur, while Bharata is away
from the city."


" Bharata, your brother, goes according to his eldest brother. He is righteous,
compassionate and has the senses under control. He verily follows the path of good people."


"Oh, Rama! It is my opinion that minds of men are inconstant. But the ever
righteous, endowed with goodness, sometimes may act unexpectedly on impulse."


Dasaratha, after telling in this way about the ensuing coronation ceremony scheduled
for the next day, permitted Rama to depart. Rama offered his salutations to his father and went to
his house.


After hearing the decision of Dasaratha regarding coronation ceremony, Rama entered
his house and by starting immediately, went to his mother's queenly house.


There, in the queen's worshipping place, Rama saw Kausalya silently in meditation,
wearing silk clothes and praying to goddess Lakshmi.


Hearing the good news of the coronation ceremony of Rama, Sumitra and Lakshmana came
there even before Seetha was brought.


At that time, Kausalya closed her eyes and was in meditation. Along with her,
Sumitra, Lakshmana and Seetha were sitting nearby.


Hearing that her son will be anointed for the princely kingdom on the day of
Pushyami star, Kausalya with controlled breath, was meditating on lord Vishnu.


Rama approached his mother, even while she was engaged in pious observance, offered
salutation and spoke the following words making her delighted.


"Oh, mother! My father ordered that I should rule the people. As per his orders,
there will be anointing ceremony to me tomorrow."


"Seetha too, along with me should observe fast this whole night. The father together
with preceptors and teachers said this to me."


"Have all the auspicious rites that are required for the ensuing tomorrow's
anointment ceremony, performed to me and to Seetha today."


Hearing the news of anointment ceremony, which was being desired by her for a long
time, Kausalya spoke to Rama the following sweet words with tears of joy in her eyes.


"Oh, child Rama! You live a long life! Let your enemies be destroyed! Let the
cousins of mine and of Sumitra be made happy by your glory."


"O, my little son! You were born to me on a day of an auspicious star. That is why,
your father king Dasaratha was propitiated by your virtues."


"O, son! My worship to the lotus eyed Lord Vishnu with endurance has become
fruitful. Hence, this glorious kingdom of Ikshvaku dynasty is going to embrace you."


Rama, after hearing the words spoken by his mother, saw his brother Lakshmana who
was sitting humbly nearby with joined palms and spoke to him smilingly as follows:


"O, Lakshmana! You rule this earth together with me. This glorious kingdom has
reached you, who are my second conscience."


"O, Lakshmana! You enjoy the benefits as desired by you and the fruits of kingdom. I
desire to live and even to rule the kingdom but for you."


Rama, after speaking thus to Lakshmana, offered salutations to both the mothers, got
Seetha to obtain permission from them and went to his house along with Seetha.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Reproaching Kaikeyi in that manner, Bharata again spoke the following words, wrapped
as he was in great anger.


"O, Kaikeyi! The cruel and evil-mannered woman! Get lost from this kingdom. You
having abandoned righteousness, remain lamenting about me, who will be dead soon."


"What harm king Dasaratha or the highly righteous Rama have done to you so harshly
that Dasaratha's death and Rama's exile have occurred at one and the same time because of you?"


"O, Kaikeyi! You got the sin of killing an embryo because of the destruction of this
race. O, Kaikeyi! Go to hell .Do not get the residence in the same heaven as your husband."


"You have done this terrific act and committed such a great sin. By forsaking the
persons beloved by all, an alarm has been created in me also."


"My father died and Rama is dwelling in a forest, because of you. You got me ill
fame in this world of beings."


"Though in appearance you are my mother, you are inimical to me. You are a cruel
woman, greedy of kingdom. With evil conduct, you killed your husband. I should never speak to
you."


"Kausalya, Sumitra and my other mothers are engrossed in a great misfortune, by
falling victim to you, who brought disgrace to our family."


"The righteous Rama, who is forever devoted to truth, was sent to the forest. Due to
grief for his son, my father went to heaven. You do not seem to be the daughter of Asvapati, the
pious and sensible king. You were born there as a demo ness, to destroy the house of my
father."


"The aforesaid sin you have committed has made me father less. Besides, I have been
abandoned by my brothers and all the people dislike me now."


"O, woman having evil desires, moving towards hell! Which world will you attain now,
after making Kausalya endowed with righteousness, deprived of her son?"


"O, cruel woman! Don't you know that Rama the son of Kausalya is a subdued man, who
is devoted to his relatives and as an eldest brother, equal to a father?"


"A son is the most beloved to his mother as he is born from the primary and
secondary limbs of her body and also from her heart. The other relatives are only like
friends."


"Once upon a time, Kamadhenu the mythical cow of Vasista, who knew righteousness and
was worshipped by celestials, is said to have seen her sons, drawing a heavy burden on earth and
became unconscious."


"Seeing her sons (a pair of bullocks) fatigued, after toiling for half a part of
their day on earth, Kamadhenu the mythical cow cried with her eyes full of tears in grief for the
fate of her sons."


"Small and sweet smelling tear drops of that mythical cow fell on the limbs of the
high soled Indra the lord of celestials, who was traveling below in a lower region."


"Seeing those sweet- scented tears falling on his limbs, Indra the Lord of
celestials identified the tears to be those of the great Kamadhenu the mythical cow."


"Looking into the sky, Indra saw that Kamadhenu standing there with anguish and
pitiably weeping with great grief."


"Indra the lord of celestials with a thunder bolt in his hand, seeing that beautiful
Kamadhenu the mythical cow, tormented with grief, spoke eagerly with joined palms to her, as
follows:


"O, cow the well wisher of all! I hope there is no great panic from any quarter to
us. For what occasion is your sorrow?"


"Hearing the words of the intelligent Indra the god of celestials, the prudent
Kamadhenu who was skilled in expressing words, replied as follows:


"Heaven forefend that evil! O, Indra the lord of celestials! There is no danger
whatsoever to you from any quarter. Seeing these pair of bullocks, my sons, who are in hardship,
being scorched by sun's rays, becoming weak, being troubled by the man who ploughs the land and
being immersed in grief, I am pitiably weeping O, Indra!"


"By seeing them who are afflicted with the burden and aggrieved, I am greatly
anguished. They are indeed born of my body. There is no dearest one equal to a son indeed!"


Seeing such a sacred cow weeping, whose hundreds of sons pervaded the entire world,
Indra reckoned none whosoever as more than a son (to a mother) .


"Such a Kamadhenu the sacred cow, which is desirous of maintaining the world always
having unequalled behavior, the venerable one, by its very nature functioning forever with good
qualities and to whom there are thousands of sons, is lamenting, how much more indeed Kausalya will
drag her existence, without Rama?"


"She, who has only one son and who is a holy woman, has been made without a child by
you. Thereafter, you will obtain grief forever after your death or even here while living."


"I for my part, shall toil for the complete reinstatement of my brother and complete
the obsequial rites due to my father as well as for their prosperity and glory. There is no
doubt."


"Rama the son of Kausalya, of great prowess will be brought back to Ayodhya and I,
myself will go to the forest inhabited by the sages."


"O, wretched and evil minded woman! By seeing the sorrow stricken citizens, I am
indeed not able to bear the inequity done by you."


"As for you, enter the fire or you yourself go to forest of Dandaka.or fasten a rope
around your neck. There is no other recourse for you."


"After Rama the truly mighty man, obtains his native land, I will even become an
accomplished man, with my sins duly washed away."


As an elephant in a forest pricked with a javelin and a goad and as a hissing
serpent, Bharata was enraged and fell on the ground.


His eyes inflamed, his clothes in disarray, and his all ornaments discarded, Bharata
the prince and the tormentor of foes, lay on the earth, like a banner of Indra raised at the end of
a ceremony**

undefined

undefined

undefined


Bharata endowed with understanding, saw that assembly, enriched with the whole body
of respectable men, looking like a night in full moon duly enriched with well-known planets.


That excellent assembly was aglow with the brilliance of clothes and scented
cosmetics of its respected members occupying their appropriate seats.


That beautiful assembly filled with learned men looked like a night with autumn full
moon.


Beholding all the entire body of ministers of the king, Vaishta the knower of
righteousness uttered to Bharata the following soft-spoken words:


"O, beloved Bharata! The king Dasaratha, practicing righteousness, gave away to you
this wide earth endowed with grains and riches and went to heaven."


"Rama, who was firmly established in truth, remembering the righteousness of good
men, did not abandon the command of his father, as a raising moon does not abandon the
moon-light."


"The kingdom, having its enemies destroy was given to you by your father and
brother. Enjoy it, with its delightful ministers. Get anointed for the kingdom just soon."


"let those living in the north, the Westerners; the southerners the kings of western
borders near the Sahya mountains who are without a throne and the seafaring traders bring crores of
jewels as gifts to you."


Hearing those words, the pious Bharata was filled with distress and thirsting for
justice got his mind fixed on Rama.


The youthful Bharata, with a voice of a Hamsa bird, in the midst of the assembly,
lamented in a tearful and appealing speech. He even reproached his royal priest as follows:


"How can a man such as I, rob the throne from one, who practices Brahmacharya
(continence and chastity), versed in the science of the Vedas (sacred scriptures) and who is
devoted to duty?"


"How should one born of Dasaratha become the usurper of a crown? Both the kingdom
and I myself belong to Rama. You ought to tell the law and justice in this matter."


"Rama, the eldest son, an excellent man, a pious souled and who can be compared with
Dilipa* and Nahusha*, is eligible to get the kingdom, as with Dasaratha."


"If in this world, I dishonoured the name of Ikshavaku race, I should be guilty of a
sinful act, practiced by disgraceful men, which does not lead to heaven."


"I do not indeed like that sinful act done even by my mother. From here itself, I
offer my salutation with my joined palms to Rama who is residing in an impassable forest."


"I will follow Rama's steps. He, who is supreme among men, is the king. Rama is
eligible even for the kingdom of the three worlds."


Hearing those righteous words of Bharata, all the members of the assembly shed tears
of joy, having their minds obsessed of Rama.


"If I am unable to bring back my elder brother from the forest, I shall stay back in
that forest itself, as how the venerable Lakshmana is staying now."


"I shall use every means to bring back compulsorily, that hero before you,
practicing virtues, the honourable and the distinguished men."


"All those who are skilled in clearing paths working on and without wages, have been
sent by me in advance and the journey so planned, pleases me."


The pious minded Bharata, who had an affection for his brother spoke as aforesaid
and uttered the following words to Sumantra who was clever in giving counsel and who was sitting
nearby.


"O, Sumantra! Rise quickly and go. As per my orders, arrange for the jorney
immediately. Bring the army also."


Hearing the words of the magnanimous Bharata, Sumantra joyfully arranged all that in
accord with Bharata's orders and wishes.


Hearing about the expedition of the army too; for arranging of return of Rama, the
ministers and army-commander there were delighted.


All the wives of warriors in every house, knowing about the ensuing expedition, were
jubiliant and hurried up all their respective husband to setoff for the journey.


Those army-generals urged the entire army to march forward quickly, with the fast
moving horses, bullock carts with a good speed and the chariots along with the warriors.


Seeing that army ready, Bharata in the presence of Vasishta said as follows to
Sumantra who was standing by his side: "Get ready my chariot quickly."


Bowing to the command of Bharata and taking a chariot yoked with excellent horses,
Sumantra on his part approached him with delight.


Bharata, born in Raghu dynasty who was sincere in his purpose a powerful man having
strong and mighty prowess and whose talk was most appropriate, then spoke as follows: intending (to
undertake a journey) to persuade his illustrious elder brother, staying in dreary woods, to return
to Ayodhya.


"O, Sumantra! Rise up and proceed quickly to inform the army-chief to arrange for
the troops. After propitiating that Rama staying in the forest, I want to bring him back to Ayodhya
for the welfare of the people."


Sumantra, having received that explicit command from Bharata, which fulfilled his
highest hopes, called all the ministers-in-chief, the chiefs of the army and the friendly
multitude.


Thereupon, from every house, warriors merchants, Shudras and Brahmanas rose up and
harnessed their chariots to camels, mules, well-bred elephants and horses.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having stationed his forces, Bharata set out eagerly to see his brother, pointing
out the sign of Rama's habitation to Shatrughna.


Bharata, who was affectionate towards the elders, asked the sage Vasishta to bring
his mothers soon thereafter and went ahead quickly.


Sumantra also, equally desirous of seeing Rama; followed Shatrughna at a little
distance.


While the illustrious Bharata passed on, he observed in that wood of ascetics, a
leafy hut of his brother together with a small hut made of leaves, nearby.


Bharata then beheld wood that had been broken up and heaps of flowers gathered in
front of that hermitage.


While coming to the hermitage, Bharata saw some signs here and there serving as a
proper direction to that hermitage, tufts of Kusha grass and strips of bark tied to the trees by
Rama and Lakshmana.


Bharata also saw in the vicinity great heaps of dried dung of deers and buffaloes,
kept ready for protection against cold.


Then, proceeding further, the valiant and the mighty armed Bharata spoke to
Shatrughna in joy, as also those ministers who surrounded him.


"I think we have reached the place about which Bharadwaja directed us. I believe
Mandakini River is not far from here."


"These pieces of bark have been tied up from above. This may be the path provided as
signs by Lakshmana in order to find his way back in odd hours of darkness."


"At the side of the mountain, this is a roaming place of elephants, having huge
teeth, violent as they are and ferociously roaring at each other."


"See this intense smoke coming from that fire which the sages in the forest always
desire to keep in their hermitages."


"Here, I can see joyfully Rama, the tiger among men, who gives respect to elders and
is as venerable as a sage."


Proceeding for a while on Chitrakuta mountain and reaching the River Mandakini, that
Bharata said to his ministers and others as follows:


"The foremost of men and the Lord of the people, having sought seclusion, sat on the
floor, delighted as he was in the posture of a hero (with his left foot placed on his right knee).
O Fie unto my birth and life!"


"Rama the Lord of Men with great luster, has been overtaken by this misfortune
because of me and leaving all enjoyments, is living in the forest."


"Thus abhhored by the world, I will fall on the feet of Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana
and seek to regain Rama's grace."


As Bharata was lamenting thus, he beheld in that forest, a splendid and sacred leafy
hut, which was covered with many soft leaves of Sala, Tala and Asvakarna trees, overspread with
blades of Kusa grass in a sacrificial performance, appearing like an extensive altar and it was
adorned with bows plated with gold, like unto the weapons of Indra the Lord of celestials,
constructed for heroic exploits, having great power, the torments of their foes, graced with
fearful arrows in their quivers, like unto the rays of the sun, bright as serpents with shining
hoods, in the same way of Bhagavati (the realm of Nagas), decked with a couple of swords encased in
sheaths of gold, adorned with two shields decorated with flowers of gold, finger-guards embroidered
with gold and in different colours suspended on walls and which hut was unassailable by hordes of
enemies as is a lion's cave to deer.


Bharata saw a sacrificial altar in the north-east corner having a steep descent,
extensive in area and having a sacred fire burned in the hermitage of Rama.


Looking around for a moment, Bharata beheld his elder brother, Rama himself seated
in the hut, wearing matted locks.


Bharata saw that Rama clad in an antelope-skin and robes of bark, seated close by,
resembling a fire (in brilliance), with the neck and shoulders of a lion, mighty arms and eyes
resembling the lotus, the very virtuous Lord of the Earth extending upto the ocean, the Eternal
Brahma, and seated on the ground spread with Darbha grass, with Seetha and Lakshmana.


Beholding him, the illustrious and the high-souled Bharata the son of Kaikeyim
distraught by the grief that possessed him, rushed towards Rama.


On seeing his brother, Bharata broke into lamentations and in a voice strangled with sobs, unable to restrain his agony with firmeness, said:


"My elder brother who is fit to be honoured in an assembly by a body of ministers
around him, is now being served by a body of wild beasts around him in this jungle."


"That magnanimous hero, who formerly used to possess countless articles of apparel
is now wearing two antelope-skins, following ascetic righteousness.


"How this Rama, who used to wear various kinds of colourful flowers, is bearing this
burden of matted locks now?"


"He who acquired merit through countless sacrifices performed according to the
prescribed injunctions, now follows the path of righteousness through asceticism!"


"He whose body was formerly rendered fragrant by white sandal paste, has only dust
with which to smear the limbs of this venerable elder brother!"


"Rama who used to have happiness, has fallen into this misfortune, because of me
cursed be my reprehensive existence that the whole world condemns!"


Thus did that pitiable Bharata lament, perspiration be-dewing his lotus-like
countenance and, without touching Rama's feet, fell down grooming.


Overcome with grief, the highly valiant prince Bharata cried out "O, Noble One!"
once and in his distress, was unable to speak anything further.


Crying at the top of his voice, "O, Noble One" only, on seeing the illustrious Rama,
he was unable to speak further, his throat choked with tears.


Shatrughna too, weeping, threw himself at Rama's feet and Rama too, embracing them
both, allowed his tears to fall.


Then, in that forest, the princes Rama and Lakshmana were seen by Sumantra and Guha,
as in the sky, the sun and the moon are seen in conjunction with Venus and Jupiter.


All those dwellers in the woods, seeing those princes resembling leaders of
elephant-herbs meeting together there in that great forest, losing their cheerfulness, began to
shed tears.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Hearing the words of the chief minister, Rama who was well-versed in courtesy, spoke
then to Dasaratha as follows:


"Of what use for me, who have forsaken enjoyments, cast away attachment for
everything and am going to live in the forest on nomadic food, Oh king, with an army accompanying
me?"


"Who, after giving away a first-class elephant, will work out his mind on a rope
with which it is tied? What use is there for him through attachment to the rope after abandaning
the excellent elephant?"


"Oh, the best among good men! So also, what use is there for me by the army Oh,
King, when I am giving away absolutely all. Let the dresses of a mendicant be brought to me.'


"I am going to reside in the abode of forest for fourteen years. Bring a shoel and a
basket both for me."


Thereupon, Kaikeyi shamelessly bringing personally of men, said to Rama; "Put these
on"


Taking those two pieces of bark (as loin cloth and cover) from kaikeyi and
discarding his clothing of fine yarn, Rama put on the garb of ascetics.


Lakshmana too there itself before his father put on the clothing of ascetics, by
discarding his beautiful raiment.


Then, Seetha who wore silken clothing, by seeing the piece of bark intended to be
worne by her, felt alarming as a deer would on seeing a snare(set for entrapping)


Feeling abashed while taking the wearing apparel made of Kusa grass and greatly
troubled in mind, Seetha who bore auspicious marks knew what is righteousness who was an
illustration of righteousness spoke these words with her eyes filled with tears to her husband who
looked like Chitraratha(the king of Gandharvas)


"How ascetics residing in the forest wear this piece of bark?" Thus saying, Seetha
who was not adept in wearing the bark of trees, erred again and again(in her attempt to wear
it)


Keeping one piece of bark on her neck as well as holding it with her hand, Seetha
stood abashed, not adept as she was in wearing it.


Rama, the foremost of those upholding virute, quicky came and personally fastened
that bark over the sild garment of Seetha.


Seeing the greatest Rama fastening the bark to Seetha in that manner, the women in
the gynaecium shed tears from their eyes.


Very much distress as they were, they spoke to Rama of dazzling glory as follows: "
Dear child! This Seetha the high sould, was not so commanded to reside in the forest."


"When you departed to the forest in seclusion following the words of your father, Oh
Rama, let her sight be a reward to us till your return."


" You go to the forest along with Lakshmana as your companion Oh son! Seetha the
beautiful girl is not fit to reside in a forest like an ascetic."


"Accept our prayer, Oh son! Let Seetha the beautiful young lady stay here. Indeed,
you the ever righteous in any case do not wish to stay back.


Even after hearing their words in this manner, Rama fastened that piece of bark to
Seetha, who has a well-matched nature.


Seeing Seetha accepting the piece of bark, Vasistha the king's preceptor prevented
her and spoke thus to Kaikeyi.


"Oh the evil minded Kaikeyi, who have exceeded your limits, who have brought
disgrace to your family! You are not establishing justifiable standard and you misled the king.


"Oh, the woman without decorum! Seetha the princess shall not proceed to forest. She
will occuply the throne, which was awarded to Rama."


"A wife is very self to all, who constantly care for their wives. As Seetha is
Rama's self, she can rule the earth."


"Or rather, if Seetha goes to forest together with Rama, we also will follow suit.
This city too will go."


"The fronitier- guards and the State including its patrons, as well as this city
with its goods and chattels will go whereever Rama and his wife are there."


"Wearing pieces of bark, Bharata along with Shatrughna will live along with Rama
their brother residing in the forest and moving in the forest."


Thereafter, singly you alone with bad conduct hurt to people, rule this earth which
is bereft of people and desolate, with its trees alone remaining.


"Where Rama is not a king, that place will not indeed become on kingdom. That
forest, where Rama will be living, can become a kingdom."


"If Bharata is born to king Dasaratha, he is not fit either to rule the earth that
is not being offered by his father nor to live as a son in your case."


"Even if you can jump from the surface of the earth to the sky, Bharata who knows
the record of his father's dynasty will not do as you wish him to do"


"therefore, an unfriendly act(alone) has been done by you, eventhough you are
covetons towards his well-being. There is none indeed in this world who is not devoted to Rama"


"Oh, Kaikeyi! You will see now itself that beasts, elephants, deers and birds going
with Rama and trees also turning their faces towards Rama."


"Moreover, putting aside the bark of trees, give excellent jewellery to your
daughter-in-law, Oh, Kaikeyi! the bark of trees is not ordained for her" Thus saying so, Vasishta
prevented that wearing of garment by Seetha.


"Oh, Kaikeyi! It was solicited by you, the dwelling in the forest of Rama only. Let
Seetha, to be decorated daily, be adorned with ornaments and live in the forest along with
Rama."


"Let Seetha go with excellent conveyances, well accompanied by attendants, with all
costumes and useful accessories. Her exile was not indeed solicted by you, while asking for
boons"


Eventhough Vasista, the preceptor of the king, who had an influenc beyond compare
and the best of brahmanas was speaking as above, Seetha did not turn away here resolution to follow
the ways of her beloved husband.


Thus completes thirty seventh chapter of ayodhya Kanda in glorious Valmiki Ramayana,
the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Rama, the foremost of those affording happiness to others, reached the aforesaid
tree, worshipped the western twilight and spoke to Lakshmana as follows:


"This might which has got past us today outside the inhabited territory is the first
night which has passed without Sumantra. You ought not repent over it."


"Remaining free from lassitude, we must both keep awake during nights, from today
Lakshmana! The safety and welfare of Sita indeed depend on us two."


"Let us pass this night anyhow, Lakshmana! Let us lie down on the ground, covering
it by straw, leaves and so on, procured by our own hands."


Streching himself on the bare ground, Rama, who was accustomed to a luxurious coach,
uttered the following suitable words to Lakshmana:


"Assuredly the emperor is sleeping badly tonight, while Kaikeyi, having realized her
ambitions, ought to feel satisfied."


"Seeing Bharata returned, queen Kaikeyi, I am afraid, may not expel the lives of the
emperor for the sake of kingdom."


"Aged and (therefore) helpless, deprived of my presence, what will he do, dominated
as he is by his passion for Kaikeyi and who has fallen into the clutches of Kaikeyi."


"Reflecting on this misfortune of the king and his mental derangement, I deem that
passion alone is greater than early gain and religious merit."


"what man however deluded, what father on account of a woman, at his own will and
pleasure, abandon a son like myself?


"Alas, Kaikeyi's son Bharata (alone) is happy along with his wife. Like an overlord,
he is going to enjoy the prosperous kingdom of Kosala."


"Father is superannuated. I am staying in the forest. Bharata will become the prime
head for the entire kingdom."


"He who pursues sensuous pleasures neglecting his real interests and discipline soon
comes to distress; in the same way as king Dasaratha has."


"It seems that Kaikeyi came into our house, oh good brother, to bring about an end
to Dasaratha, to send me into exile and to secure kingship for Bharata."


"Blinded by pride of good fortune, Kaikeyi may even now persecute Kausalya and
Sumitra because of their relationship with me."


"Queen Sumitra is likely to suffer hardship because of her affinity to us. From this
very place, you proceed to Ayodhya next morning, oh, Lakshmana!"


"I shall proceed to Dandaka forest alone with Sita, while you will be the protector
for Kausalya, who has no defender."


"Kaikeyi of base deeds may resort to unjustified means to be disliked. Give (for
protection) my mother to Bharata, oh virtuous Prince!"


"In some other (past) birth, women must have been deprived of their sons by my
mother (Kausalya), oh, Lakshmana! For that reason this has arisen certainly."


"At a time when Kausalya should have obtained benefits for her labors repaid by me,
she has been deprived of my company by me, who was nurtured by her for a long time and brought up
with great pains. Woe to me."


"Let no woman ever give birth to such a son as myself, who have caused perpetual
grief to my mother, oh, Lakshmana!"


"Oh, Lakshmana! I think that myna (which is kept as a pet by mother Kausalya) is
more affectionate than I, since her are heard the words, "Bite, oh parrot, the foot of the
enemy."


"What can be done by me, her son, who cannot go to her aid even a little to her, my
mother, who is weeping, who is unfortunate and who has no son, oh conqueror of foes?"


"Kausalya my mother of poor luck indeed, bereft of me, is stricken with great
melancholy and lies plunged in a sea of grief"


"Enraged, I can subdue with my arrows single handed not only Ayodhya but also the
earth. But it is not a question of valor here."


"Oh, the sinless Lakshmana! I am terribly concerned of doing wrong and of ruining my
prospects in the other world. Hence, I do not allow myself to be crowned."


Rama during the night in that lonely forest, wailed piteously thus and in so many
other ways and sat quite, his face full of tears.


Lakshmana consoled Rama as follows when the later had ceased lamenting like a fire whose flames had gone out and as a sea without a violent motion.


"The city of Ayodhya, now that you have come away from it, has certainly been
divested of its splendor and resembles a night without the moon, Oh, Rama the jewel among armed
warriors!"


"It is not proper, oh Rama, that you should grieve in this way. You cause distress
to Sita and me too, oh jewel among men!"


"Oh, Rama! Bereft of you , neither Sita nor I will not survive even for a moment,
like fish pulled out of water."


"Oh, Rama causing pain to the foes! Without you, I do not wish to see either our
father or Satrughna or Sumitra or even the heaven."


Then Rama and Lakshmana the lovers of piety, sitting comfortably there and on seeing
a bed well- prepared under a banyan tree, sought for the bed.


Attentively hearing Lakshmana's words which were excellent and wholistic and
adopting for a fairly long period the course of conduct prescribed for hermits, Rama resolved to
spend all the fourteen years in exile with Lakshmana.


Thence forward, those two powerful offspring of the Raghu race (Rama and Lakshmana)
never admitted fear or agitation (while dwelling) in that vast and lonely forest any more than a
couple of lions on the slopes of a mountain.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Recognising that Rama has become angry, Vashishta spoke as follows: "Even Jabali is
aware of the going and coming of this world."


"He apoke in this manner, on account of his desire that you should return. O, Lord
of the poeple! Learn from me of the creation of the world!"


"All was water only in the beginning" from which element the earth was formed. After
that, the self-existent Brahma with all the gods came into existence."


"Thereafter, that Brahma, assuming the form of boar, caused the earth to rise from
water and with his sons of pure soul, created the entire world."


"The eternal, changeless and imperishable Brahma was begotten from ether and from
his was born Marichi. Marichi's son was kashyapa."


"From Kashyapa, Vivasvan(sun-god) was born. manu was the son of Vivasvan. Manu for
his part, was formerly the lord of creation. Ikshvaku was Manu' s son."


"The entire fertile earth was given by Manu to Ikshvaku and know that Ikshvaku was
thus the first king of Ayodhya!"


"Ikshvaku's son was known as Kukshi, the illustrious king. Then, Kukshi's son was
the valiant Vikukshi."


"To Vikukshi was born the most splendid and powerful son, Bana. To Bana was born
Anaranya the mighty armed and the most illustrious son."


"While this King Anaranya, the most excellent among beings was reigning, there was
neither dearth of rain nor a drought. No one was a thief."


"From Anaranya was born the mighty armed king Prithu. From Prithu was born the
Emperor Trishanku. That valiant man ascneded to heaven along with his mortal body, because of his
true eloquence."


"To Trishanku was born a son, the highly illustrious Dundhumara. From Dundhumara was
born the hero, Yuvanasva."


"The illustrious Mandhata was born as a son to Yuvanasva. To Mandhata was born the
hero, Susandhi. There were two sons Dhruvasandhi and prasenajit to Susandhi. From Dhruvasandhi was
born the illustrious Bharata, the annihilator of enemies."


"From the mighty armed Bharata was born a son named Asita, for whom his royal
adversaries, Haihayas, Talajanghas and the valiant Shashibindavas became the enemies."


"Having drawn out his battle-array against all those kings in a combat, the king
Asita was driven away. Asita then became a devoted sage taking asylum in an excellent and charming
mountain."


"Asita's two wives became pregnant. It is a hearsay that one of his wives gave
poison to the other co-wife in order to destroy her foetus."


"A sage called Chyavana, belonging to Bhrign race was staying in a Himalayan
mountain. Kalindi (Asita's wife) approached that sage and offered her salutation. That brahmna
spoke the following words to her, who wanted to obtain a boon for the birth of a son."


"O, Queen! A high-souled son, who will be world-famous, rightous, of a good conduct,
a perpetuator of the race and an annihilator of enemies will be born to you."


"The delighted Queen Kalindi circumambulated that sage, took permission from him to
leave and thereafter on reaching home, had delivered a son, having eyes resembling lotus-leaves and
having a radiance like that of Brahama the Lord of creation."


"Poison was given earlier by her co-wife with an intention to kill her foetus. Born
with that poison itself, he became Sagara (a man with poison)."


"It was king SAgara who excavated the ocen and who, by his sacrifice, on the day of
the full moon, by his energy, frightened the people here by the speed of his digging."


"Asamanja was Sagara's son. There was a hearsay that on account of his wicked deeds,
Asamanja was banished by his father even during his life time."


"A valiant son called amshuman was born to Asamanja. Dilipa was Amshuman's son.
Bhagiratha was Dilipa's son.


"Of Bhagiratha was born kakutstha, from whom the Kakutsthas take their name. To
Kakutsthas was born a son called Raghu, from whence spring Raghavas."


"From Raghu was born a renowned son named Pravriddha, known in the world under the
names Purushadaka, Kalmashapada and Soudasa."


"Kalmashapada's son was renowned as Shankhana, who, even on attaining his father's
valour, perished (in a battle) along with his army."


The fortunate Sudarshana was the son of Shankhana. Sudarshana's son was Agnivarna;
and of Agnivarna was born Shighraga. Shighraga begot Maru and Maru's son was Prashushruva from
Prashushruva was born Ambarisha of that great radiance. To Ambarisha was born a son named Nahusha
who was full of valour. Nahusha's son was Nabhaga of outstanding virtue. Aja and Suvrata were the
two sons of Nabhaga and it was Aja who begot the virtuous King Dasartha."


"You are the eldest son of that Dasaratha, very well-known as Rama, the heir who can
claim over the inheritance. O, King! Hence, take over your kingdom and look after your people
there."


"The eldest son only becomes the king in the entire Ikshvaku race. When the eldest
son exists, the younger son will not become a king. The eldest son only is anointed to the
crown.


"O, the celebrated one! This is the eternal tradition of your race, those born in
Raghu dynasty and ought not to be violated by you. Rule over the earth, this vast kingdom abudant
with precious metals, as did your father."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Then, Rama gently woke up Lakshmana, who was sleeping without break, even when the
night was passing away.


"Oh, Lakshmana! Hear the sound of wild animals, resounding beautifully. It is time
for our journey. Let us start."


That Lakshmana who was sleeping, being woken up by his brother at the right moment,
had relinquished sleep, sloth and strain which resulted on the way.


Thereafter, all of them raised up touched the auspicious water (took bath) in the
river and proceeded towards the path leading to Chitrakuta mountain, as suggested by the sage
Bharadwaja.


Rama who set out along with Lakshmana at that dawn, spoke as follows to Seetha whose
eyes looked like lotus leaves.


"Oh, Seetha! Behold Kimshuka trees with their diadem of flower blossoming all over,
as if they are blazing up, in this winter."


"Look at these Bhallataka (cashew nut) trees, abounding in flowers and bent down
with fruits and leaves, all unplucked by men. We can certainly live here."


"Oh, Lakshmana! Behold in every tree the hanging honey-combs, with sizes of a
water-trough, gathered by honey-bees.


In this beautiful forest-region, dense with a scattered mass of flowers, a Chataka
bird is crying and a peacock is responding to it."


"See this Chitrakuta mountain with a high and mighty peak, wide-spread with a
multitude of elephants and made to resound by a congregation of birds."


"Oh, brother! We shall sport in this forest of Chitrakuta, having a level-ground
beautifully extensive with many trees and is pure."


Thereafter, Rama and Lakshmana along with Seetha traveling on foot, approached the
mountain of Chitrakuta, which was pleasant and lovely.


Reaching that mountain, with various flocks of birds, with many roots and fruits,
lovely and rich in streaming water, Rama said to Lakshmana as follows:


"It is appearing to me that this beautiful Chitrakuta mountain yields an easy
sustenance, for, it is charmingly filled with various kinds of trees and creepers with different
kinds of roots and fruits."


"Oh, gentle brother! High souled sages are also staying on this mountain. Let this
become the dwelling. Let us have a pleasant resort here."


After deciding thus Seetha, Rama and Lakshmana all with joined palms approached the
hermitage and offered salutation to the sage Valmiki.


The great sage Valmiki, who knew what is right, full of delight, treated them with
honour, offered cordial welcome and requested them to sit.


Then Rama, the lord with mighty arms, in accord with tradition, reported to the
ascetic all that concerned them and spoke to Lakshmana as follows:


Lakshmana, my gentle brother! Bring strong and choicest timber and construct a
dwelling. My mind is fascinated in dwelling here."


Hearing those words of Rama, Lakshmana brought various kinds of trees. Thereafter,
he the annihilator of enemies, constructed a leaf-hut.


Seeing that hut, which was firmly built and thatched as well as beautiful to look
at, Rama spoke the following words to Lakshmana who listened to his command and who was closely
attentive to him:


"Oh, Lakshmana! Bring the meat of an antelope. We shall perform a purifactory
ceremony while entering the house. Which is to be done by those who wish to live long."


"Oh, large-eyed Lakshmana! Killing the antelope quickly, bring it here. The
prescribed rite according to scriptural point of view indeed is to be performed. Keep in mind the
sacred obligation."


Lakshmana the slayer of enemies, understanding his brother's words, acted as
instructed. Rama spoke again to Lakshmana as follows.


"Oh, gentle brother! Boil this antelope's meat. We shall worship the leaf-hut. This
day and this instant also are of a distinctive character. Be quick."


Then, Lakshmana the strong man and son of Sumitra, killing a holy back antelope,
tossed it in an ignited fire.


Feeling certain that it is cooked and heated thoroughly with no blood remaining,
Lakshmana spoke to Rama the lion among man as follows:


"This black antelope, with its complete limbs, has been cooked completely by me. Oh,
Rama resembling God! Worship the concerned deity, as you are skilled in that act."


Rama, the virtuous man and the learned man in chanting of sacred spells, after
taking bath and with subdued mind, briefly chanted all the sacred scripts to be chanted at the end
of a purifactory ceremony.


Worshipping all classes of deities and getting himself purified, Rama entered the
house. There was a heartful joy in rama, with his limitless splendour.


Having taken bath in the river as prescribed Rama offered oblations to Lord Rudra
and Lord Vishnu after offereing tributes to Vaisvadeva. He performed benedictions relating to the
purification of house and also a silent prayer as per prescribed rites. He finally offered
excellent tributes to the deities, for removing sins.


Lakshmana erected altars in all the quarters of the hermitage as was fitting,
Chaityas (places for worship of Lord Ganesha and others) and Ayatanas (places for worship of Vishnu
and others)


Rama and Lakshmana along with Seetha, having auspicious characteristics, satisfied
the sirits by crowns of flowers obtained in the forest, by fruits roots and cooked meat, by water,
by prayers as uttered in the sacred texts (Vedas), by sacred grass, by fuel and Kusa grass and then
entered the auspicious leaf-hut.


All of them (Seetha, Rama and Lakshmana) together for residential purpose, entered
that hut, thatched with leaves of trees, looking beautiful, well-constructed at a suitable site and
protected from winds, as if entering an assembly-hall called Sudharma (in heavn) by a group of
celestials.


Seetha, Rama and Lakshmana who subdued their senses, very happily strolled in that
excellent forest, filled with many classes and multitude of beasts and birds, trees having
multi-coloured crowns of flowers, and resonating with sounds of elephants in rut and of
antelopes.


Delighted and joyful to reach the lovely Chitrakuta mountain and the river
Malyavati, provided with good descents and frequented by birds and beasts, Seetha, Rama and
Lakshmana shed the agony caused by their exile from the City of Ayodhya.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having spoken thus to Rama, Vasishta the royal priest added the following righteous
words:


"O, Kakutstha, O offspring the Raghu dynasty! From birth, the three spiritual
instructors of a man are his teacher, his father and his mother."


"O, excellent among men! The father of man his life. The teacher instructs him in
wisdom and therefore instructs the teacher is said to be the superior!"


"O, Rama the tormentator of the enemies! I am the spiritual Preceptor to your father
and to you too. In obeying my words, you will not transgress the path of the virtuous."


"O, dear prince! These subjects, the traders, the other categories of people and
Brahmana are your people only. In fulfilling your duty to them, you will not be transgressing your
righteous path."


"You ought not to be lacking in reverence to your mother who is aged and possessing
a noble conduct. By carrying out her words, you will not deviate from the path of the
virtuous."


"O, Rama excelling in truth and virtue. By fulfilling the words of the beseeching
Bharata, you will not be false to yourself."


Having heard the sweet words spoken by his spiritual preceptro himself, Rama the
excellent among men replied (as follows) to Vasishta who was seated there.


"The good, which a father and mother do, by giving whatever they can, to their son
constantly, by putting him to sleep, rubbing his body with oil etc, nay, by speaking kindly to him
every moment, and even by nourishing him, can never be wholly requited."


"The command laid upon me by king Dasaratha, my father, who begot me, cannot
therefore be disregarded."


Hearing Rama's words, the most generous Bharata felt very mcuh anguished and
addressed the following words to Sumantra the charioteer who was standing nearby:


"O, charioteer! Spread speedily the Kusha grass on the ground here for me. I shall
remain facing my illustrious brother till he gets propitiated (and grant my request)."


"I shall remain lying down in front of Rama's hut without food or drink and
depriving myself of light until he returns to Ayodhya, like a brahman who is a destitute (lies down
at the door of his crditor)."


Seeing Sumantra who was gazing at Rama waiting for his command, the low-spirited
Bharata, on his own, brought a heap of Kusha grass and spread it on the floor.


Rama of great splendour and the best among royal sages spoke to Bharata as follows:
"O Bharata my dear brother! What wrong have I done that you lie down before me?"


"A brahmana may lie down on one side in order to obstruct a willful debtor in this
world. But, it is not befitting for a warrior-class.


"O Bharata, Tiger among men! Giving up this formidable resolve, rise up proceed
speedily to Ayodhya the best of cities, from here."


Still sitting in the same posture, Bharata looked at the citizens and rural folk
around on all sides and asked them why they were not entreating his venerable brother to
return.


Those people, the inhabitants of town and country replied to the magnanimous Bharata
as follows: "We know Rama very well. He is speaking rightly."


"This Rama of exalted merit is indeed standing on his father's words. Hence, we are
not able to convince him to return to Ayodhya."


Hearing their words, Rama said to Bharata: "Reflect on the words of your companions,
who see rightly."


"O the mighty armed Bharata! Having listened to their testimony and mine, reflect on
the matter carefull. Rise and touch me and drink water."


Thereafter, Bharata rose, touched water and spoke as follows: "Let the audience,
including ministers and the guild of traders hear me also."


"I never asked my father for the kingdom, nor did I counsel my mother to enthrone
me. I never gave my approval for the exile of Rama, the venerable hero, who knows his duty very
well."


"If it is absolutely essential that one of us should remain here and the command of
our father be executed, then it is I who will reside in the forest for fourteen years."


The high-souled Rama was surprised by the sincere words of his brother and by
looking at the inhabitants of town and country, spoke (as follows):


"The disposal, the pledge and the come-by which he was alive, cannot be broken
either by me or by Bharata."


"I cannot accede to the substitute in respect of the sojourn in the forest and it is
distasteful thing. What was advised by Kaikeyi was proper and what was done by my father was a
righteous deed."


"I am aware that Bharata has necessary patience and due devotion for the elders. All
will be propitious in the case of this magnanimous Bharata, who is true to his promise."


"After returning from the forest, I shall rule the earth, assisted by my virtuous
brother."


"The king Dasaratha was indeed solicited for a boon by Kaikeyi. That word of the
king has been fulfilled by me. Hence, relieve our father, the emperor from the blame."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Seeing the aforesaid deceased king, who looked like a fully extinguished fire, a
waterless ocean and a lusterless sun, Kausalya holding the king's head on her lap with her eyes
full of tears and who was stricken with grief of various sorts, spoke to Kausalya as follows:


"O Kaikeyi the cruel one and the doer of evils! You be there, having fulfilled your
desires. Deserting the king, you can enjoy the kingdom undisturbed and without any hindrance.


"Rama has left me and gone to the forest. My husband too has left for heaven. I do
not wish to live, as one left behind by a caravan in a wrong road."


"Which woman would wish to survive, leaving her husband who was divine, except
Kaikeyi who kicked off righteousness?"


"A greedy person cannot understand one's faults, like one who eats a forbidden dish.
Due to that hump- backed woman, Kaikeyi has ruined the race of Raghu dynasty."


"Hearing Rama along with his wife have been sent to exile by the king as he was
coerced as he was (Kaikeyi) to do an unworthy act, Janaka will profusely lament as I do."


"Rama the pious man who is possessed of like lotus leaves, and who has disappeared
from here even though living, now does not know me to have because a support -less widow.


"Even so, Sita, the daughter of king of Videha, the pitiable lady and who is
unworthy of lamentation, will get frightened with grief in the forest.


"Greatly alarmed to hear the fearful cries of wild animals and birds making their
noises in nights, surely she will cling herself to Rama.


"Janaka too who is aged, and who is not having sons, will be thinking of Sita, over
whelmed with grief and will surely abandon his life.


"Today itself, I too in devotion to my husband, will meet my appointed end. I shall
enter the fire, duly embracing this body of my husband.


The chamberlains reverently removed from that place that unfortunate Kausalya, who
was in excess of her grief and was closely embracing her dead husband.


The ministers assigned for the job kept the king in an oil trough and did all the
acts that were to be done therafter.


The ministers who were knowing all such matters were not willing to do cremation for
the king in the absence of his sons and that is why preserved the king's body .(in an oil
through).


Seeing that the king was laid down in an oil through by the ministers those women in
the gynaacium cried "Alas! He is dead!"


Crying their faces with eyes flowing with tears, the miserable women through up
their arms, stricken with grief as they were and pitiably lamented as follows:


"Alas! Great king! When we are already deprived of Rama who speaks lovingly and who
always keeps up his promise, why have you left us?"


"Far in distance from Rama, how shall we without our husband, live in proximity to
Kaikeyi of wretched nature, who killed her husband?


"Rama, a protector to you and all of us as well as a capable, prudent and an eminent
man, has indeed gone on exile to the forest, leaving this lovely kingdom.


"How can we, being disgraced by Kaikeyi, and stupefied by evil passion, live without
you and the heroic Rama."


"Whom else will Kaikeyi by whom have been abandoned the king as well as Rama along
with Lakshmana great strength and Sita- not abandon?


"With tears and excessive agony, those excellent Dasaratha's wives together in a
row, rolled on the ground, sorrowful as they were."


The city of Ayodhya, bereft of the high-soled king Dasaratha, was splendour-less, as
a night without moon and as awoman without husband.


With people disturbed with tears, with virtuous women raising cries of distress and
with its cross -roads and entrances of houses looking desolate, the city of Ayodhya did not shine
as before.


While the king has gone to heaven due to grief and while the king's wives were lying
on the ground , the sun suddenly went away retreating its movement. The night approached, with its
darkness having proceeded to spread throughout.


The friends and relatives who came there, did not like the king's cremation in the
absence of his sons. Thus thinking, they kept the king of inconceivable sight in that resting
place(oil- trough)


Deserted by the high-soled Dasaratha, with its roads and cross roads filled with
people choked with tears in their throats, the city of Ayodhya, looking like sky without sun and
night with its multitude of stars disappeared, did not shine with its light having gone away.


After the king's death, men and women in the city converged in groups, abusing
Bharata's mother, became disturbed and did not obtain happiness.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Witnessing that thrilling converse between those two brothers with incomparable
dignity, the great sages gathered there were astonished.


The assemblies of ascetics, great saints present there and the distinguished sages
who stood invisible in space, applauded both Rama and Bharata, the magnanimous brothers, saying (as
follows):


"That Dasaratha, who begot these two sons, who know righteousness and whose strength
is justice, was fortunate. By hearing the debate between these two princes, we are indeed
delighted."


Thereafter, that assembly of sages, who wished to see a quick destruction of Ravana,
came together and spoke the following words to Bharata, the excellent king.


"O Bharata born in a noble race, highly intelligent, having a superior conduct and a
great repute! If you have regard for your father, Rama's words are to be accepted.


"We wish to see Rama absolved of all obligations forever to his father. Dasaratha,
having honoured his pledge to Kaikeyi, indeed went to heaven."


Having uttered that much, all the celestial musicians and the great sages then went
to their respective abodes.


Hearing those auspicious words, the good-looking Rama looked radiant and worshipped
those sages with a joyful countenance.


Bharata, on his part, with trembled limbs, joined his palms in salutation and again
spoke the following words to Rama in a strangled voice:


"O, Rama! Keep in view the continuance of our royal statue and the statute of the
race. You ought to yield to the entreaties of mine and those of your mother."


"I am not able to rule this vast empire alone to the satisfaction of the beloved
inhabitants of town and country!"


"Our kith and king, soldiers, companions and allies are waiting for you indeed, as
farmers wait for the rainy clouds."


"O, the sagacious Rama! Return to the kingdom and keep it in order. You have the
competence to save the world!"


That Bharata, who was kind-spoken, thus made a fervent appeal to Rama and fell at
his feet.


Placing on his lap, that Bharata of dark hue, with eyes resembling lotus-petals and
having a voice like that of a swan in rut, Rama spoke the following words to him:


"O, my dear brother! You are very much competent to rule the earth, by the intellect
you obtained both inherently and by training."


"Take counsel with your ministers, companions and intelligent counsellors and get
all activities done, even if they are gigantic."


"Light may go off from the moon; Himalayan mountain may shake off its snows; the sea
may transgress its shores, but I will never be false to my father's vow!"


"My dear brother! Your mother acted thus, for your sake, out of her affection or
ambition. It should not be carried out in your mind. You ought to obey her as your mother."


Bharata replied (as follows) to Rama, who was speaking as aforesaid and who was
equal to sun by his splendour or to the moon in its first quarter.


"O, noble brother! Pray mount with your feet on the wooden sandals adorned with
gold! Surely, these will bestow, gain and security to all the people!"


Rama, the tiger among men, possessing exceptional glory, placing his feet on the
sandals and leaving them, gave them to the magnanimous Bharata.


Bowing before the sandals, Bharata spoke the following words to Rama: "O, Rama the
hero and the tormentator of enemies! For fourteen years, I shall wear matted locks and robes of
bark, live on fruits and roots O Rama, and live outside the city, offering the ruling of the
kingdom to your sandals."


"O, Rama! If I do not see you the following day when the fourteenth year has fully
ended, I shall enter the fire once for all."


"So be it" promised Rama, embraced that Bharata with affection, took Shatrughna also
in his arms and spoke to Bharata as follows:


"O Bharata! Protect your mother, Kaikeyi. Do not get angry with her. You are taken
vow thus by me and by Seetha." speaking thus, Rama with his eyes filled iwth tears, bade farewell
to his brother.


The valiant Bharata, who knew righteousness worshipped those sandals which were
well-decorated made a circumambulation to Rama and kept the sandals on the head of an excellent
elephant.


Rama, the augmentator of Raghu dynasty, being firm as a Himalayan rock in abiding in
his own righteousness, greeted those men, in accord with their rank, the host of his preceptors,
ministers, subjects and his brothers and bade farewell to all of them.


His mothers, their voices choked with tears due to sorrow, were unable to bid
farewell verbally to Rama. However, Rama himself offered his salutations to all his mothers and
entered his hermitage, weeping.

undefined

undefined

undefined


The highly illustrious Lord, Bharata riding on a chariot emanating a gentle and deep
sound entered soon the city of Ayodhya.


He entered the city, frequented by cats and owls, abiding with crouched men and
elephants and looking like a night enveloped by gloom, indistinctness and darkness.


Ayodhya looked like the planet Rohini, the beloved consort of the moon-god (treated
as the enemy by the demon Rahu), tormented by planet Rahu* in the ascendant though ordinarily
invested with an exceedingly bright splendour by virtue of her glory.


Ayodhya further looked emaciated like a mountain stream, whose scanty waters had
become hot and agitated, birds living in which were scorched by the sun, and whose fish, small and
big and alligators had perished.


Ayodhya looked like a flame of sacrificial fire which when oblation is poured into
it, rises like a golden cone without smoke and thereafter sinks into extinction (ash).


Ayodhya looked like an afflicted army, shattered of its armour in a major conflict,
whose ensigns borne on horses, elephants and chariots had been torn, and its heroic warriors
slain.


Ayodhya appeared like the waves of the sea though tosses very high with foam and a
roar, is rendered noiseless, being shaken up by a silent wind.


Ayodhya appeared like a sacred altar, which, when the period of offering oblations
into fire has completely expired, has been cleared of all sacrificial implements and deserted of
recitations by the learned priests.


Ayodhya appeared like restless kine, deprived of the bull, who cease to graze in new
pastures and stand in the cow-pen, dispirited.


Ayodhya was resembling a new pearl-necklace, bereft of well- polished dazzling and
excellent gems, rubies and the like, of genuine quality.


Ayodhya appeared like a meteor, which moved from its position with its virtue
exhausted, soon dropped from the sky and fallen to earth, deprived of its splendour.


Ayodhya appeared like a flowering creeper laden with blossom in the spring-tide,
frequented by a swarm of intoxicated bees, that is suddenly consumed by a forest fire and
withering.


With its senseless traffic paralyzed and with its fairs and markets closed, Ayodhya
resembled like a firmament, covered with clouds, with the moon and stars obscured.


Ayodhya appeared splendourless, like a deserted and uncleaned tavern, with its
vendor of spirituous liquors killed, the excellent wine expended, its drinking pots and glasses
broken and the pieces stewn in disorder.


Ayodhya resembled a cistern erected for storage and distribution of water, but now
broken and collapsed with its platform riven and sunk, and covered with broken jars and earthen
vessels, its water having been used up.


Ayodhya resembled a bow-string, which was large and bent, with suitable noose at
both ends, but severed from the bow by the arrows of heroes and fallen to the ground.


Ayodhya appeared like a mare, urged on suddenly by a horse-man, skilled in war-fare
and fallen down when killed by the opposite army.


Sitting in the chariot, the glorious Bharata, the son of Dasaratha, spoke the
following words to the charioteer who was riding his excellent chariot:


"How is it that the deep and intensified sound of vocal and instrumental music is
not heard as before in Ayodhya today?"


"The intoxicating odour of spirituous liquor or the fragrance of floral garlands or
the aroma of sandal and aloe-wood fumes, which used to be spread once on all sides, are not being
wafted."


"O, Sumantra! I do not hear, as before, the sound of the horses, the sound of the
intoxicating elephants and the clattering of the great chariots in this city now."


"Rama, having left Ayodhya, the distressful youth are not making use of the perfumes
like sandal-wood, aloe wood as also the most admirable and fresh floral garlands."


"In the city afflicted by Rama's desertion, people are not going out for
pleasure-trips, wearing colourful garlands nor festivals are observed by them."


"The lustre of Ayodhya has departed along with my brother. It is certain. This
Ayodhya is not shining indeed, like a rainy night at the time of the waning moon."


"When will my brother return, like a carnival, diffusing joy in Ayodhya, as do the
autumnal rains?"


"The highways in Ayodhya are not glittering with youthful people, richly attired,
bearing themselves bravely and roaming about in groups."


Thus speaking in many ways, Bharata entered his father's house, bereft of that
emperor and which resembled a cave bereft of a lion.


Bharata, though a composed man himself, shed tears by seeing that entire empty
gynaecium, looking like a day without the sun with its relinquished radiance.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having stayed that night there, those princes the annihilators of enemies,
thereafter offered salutation to the sage Bharadwaja and proceeded towards that mountain of
Chitrakuta.


That great sage Bharadwaja performed a religious rite ensuring a sage journey
(scattering boiled rice on the ground and invoking blessing through the repetition of certain
sacred texts0 for them. Perceiving them setting out for the journey, the sage accompanied them for
a distance, as a father would do for his sons (and daughter-in-law).


Bharadwaja the great sage with a remarkable splendour began to speak the following
words to Rama the truly brave man.


"After approaching Oh, the best of men! The confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, follow
the river Yamuna which takes to the direction of west."


"Reaching the River Yamuna belonging to olden times, having a rapid stream and
perceiving in it a passage for descent into the river, which is too much frequented the river,
which is too much frequented, you cross the River Yamuna (the daughter of the sun-god) by preparing
a raft there, Oh Rama!"


After crossing the river Yamuna and approaching a large banyan tree named Syama
(dark-green) having green leaves surrounded by many tress and visited by Siddhas, Seetha should,
joining her palms, recite her auspicious prayers to the tree."


"Having approached that tree, you can stay there or go beyond it. After going only
for two miles from there, you will see a beautiful forest blue in colour with bamboo trees touching
upon Yamuna river and interspersed with Sallaka and jujube trees."


"It is the way to Chitrakuta. I visited that place many times. It is beautiful,
endowed with serenity and free from forest-fire."


Having thus informed the way and ebbing urged by Rama to return after he had paid
obeisance to the sage and Rama having replied so be it', the great sage Bharadwaja returned.


That sage having returned, Rama spoke to Lakshmana as follows: "Oh Lakshmana! We are
fortunate that the sage has shown compassion towards us."


Deliberating thus, Rama and Lakshmana the tigers among men who were highly
intelligent, headed for the river Yamuna guarding Seetha still in front.


Having reached the River Yamuna, running with rapid stream, all of them then plunged
into a thought of how to cross those river-waters.


Then, Rama and Lakshmana prepared a big raft with pieces of timber fastened
together, covered with a kind of grass and spread over with dry bamboo canes.


Thereafter, the valiant Lakshmana made for Seetha a comfortable seat, after chopping
branches of reeds and of rose apple tree.


Then Rama the son of Dasaratha helped Seetha his beloved consort who was
unimaginable like the goddess of fortune and who was feeling shy a little- to mount the raft.


Rama kept the two robes the jewellery, a shovel and a basket by the side of Seetha
in the raft there, along with weapons.


Those valiant sons of Dasaratha firmly held that raft, firstly helped Seetha to
ascend it and then ferried across the river watchfully.


Having arrived at the middle of Yamuna river, Seetha offered salutation to the river
and prayed as follows: "Oh, goddess of Yamuna! Adieu! I am crossing you! May my husband complete
his vow! When Rama safely comes back again towards the city of Ayodhya, ruled by Ikshvaku kings I
shall propitiate you by offering a thousand cows and a hundred drinking vessels."


Seetha of excellent complexion thus praying with joined palms to Yamuna River,
forthwith reached the southern side of the river.


Thus, by the raft, Seetha Rama and lakshmaNa crossed the River Yamuna, which flows
briskly, wreathed with waves, with many trees born on its bank and having rays for it
reflection.


They, who have crossed the river, abandoned the raft and march through the
river-forest of Yamuna and reached a cool banyan tree called Syama having green leaves.


Having approached that banyan tree, Seetha spoke these words, "Oh, great tree!
Obeisance to you! Let my husband complete his vow! Let me see again Kausalya and the illustrious
Sumitra." Thus speaking, Seetha circumambulated that tree with joined palms.


Seeing the irreproachable Seetha, who was beloved and obedient to him thus praying,
Rama spoke to Lakshmana as follows:


"Oh, Lakshmana, the excellent of men! You take Seetha and proceed in the front. I,
along with weapons, will follow you behind."


"Give to Seetha whatever fruit or flower she desires it and wherever this Seetha's
mind finds delight."


Seetha who was walking in the middle of both of them was like an auspicious female
elephant in the middle of two elephants.


That Seetha asked Rama whenever she saw the one or the other tree or a bush or a
creeper shining with flowers which was not seen earlier.


Duly grasping Seetha's words; Lakshmana brought to her many kinds of beautiful twigs
of trees, full of flowers.


Then Seetha the daughter of King Janaka was please to see the River Yamuna with
wonderful sands and waters re-echoing to the cry of swans and cranes.


Thereafter having travelled only a couple of miles the two brothers Rama and
Lakshmana killed many consecrated deer and ate in the river-forest of Yamuna.


Having strolled in the charming forest, mad noisy by a number of peacocks and which
was inhabited by elephants and monkeys and reaching an agreeable level ground at the bank of the
river wearing an undejected look finally sought for an abode for the night.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Hearing Rama's words and seeing him clad in a garb of hermit, king Dasaratha with
his wives fell unconscious. Consumed by grief, he could not look towards Rama. Troubled in mind as
he was, the king could not speak to Rama by seeing into his face.


The mighty armed Dasaratha was unconscious for some time, distressed and repented in
various ways thinking of Rama alone.


"I think that previously many people were separated from their children by me or in
any case many living beings were killed. Hence, this (calamity) has befallen me."


"life does not decamp from the body surely without the arrival of time. Death does
not claim me, even being tormented by Kaikeyi and eventhough I behold my son, efflugent as fire,
standing before me clad in the robes of an ascetic having cast off his fine garments."


"All these people are suffering on account of only Kaikeyi, who sought refuge in
chincanery, with an implicit intent of selfishness"


Having uttered these words and saying "Oh, Rama!" only once, he was not able to
speak any more, his organs of voice being choked by tears.


Regaining consciousness after a moment, the king, with his eyes filled with tears,
spoke these words to Sumantra:


"You come with a chariot, fit for driving, yoked with excellent horses and take this
highly distinguished prince beyond this territory."


"Since a pious and a valiant son is being sent to exile by father and mother, I
think such is said to be the reward of virtues of the virtueous."


Sumantra obeying the words of the king, walked away quickly and arrived there fitted
with horses, a chariot duly decorated.


The charioteer told the prince with joined palms about that chariot decorated by
gold, fitted wih superb horses.


The king, who knew what should be done at a proper place and time and was clear by
all means, quickly called an officer placed in charge of the treasury and spoke in a decisive tone
(as follows);-


"Quickly bring for Seetha, clothings of great worth and ornaments of high quality,
taking into consideration all these years (that Seetha has to spend in exile)


After thus spoken by the king, the officer went to the treasury, brought all that in
a lot and gave to Seetha.


Setting out as she was to the forest, Seetha of noble birth adorned her beautiful
limbs with those wonderful jewels.


Seetha, beautifully adorned as she was, illumined that palace, as the sky in a
morning is illuminated by a rising sun.


Embracing in her arms that princess of Mithila, who never behaved in self-pity, and
smelling her head(as a token of affection), her mother-in-law(Kausalya) spoke as follows:


"Dishonest women, eventhough adored all the time by their husbands, cease to esteem
their husband who has come to pass into evil days, throughout this world."


"Having enjoyed happiness in the past, they become spoiled and even desert their
husband, on obtaining even the least misfortune: such is the nature of (bad) women."


"Young women, who are evil-minded, are untruthful in their disposition, are affected
by passion and their essence, incomprehensible. They get aversion within a moment."


Neither a noble descent, nor an accomplishment, nor learning, nor a gift nor even
entertainment can capture the heart of women. They are unstbale of their heart indeed!"


"But, for women established in good conduct, truthfulness, sacred learning and
mental quietness, their husband alone is the most sacred entity, the best of all."


"My son who is being sent to the forest should not be despised by you. Even if he is
invested with riches or without riches, let him be a deity to you."


perceiving her words, endowed with essence of righteousness and joining her palms,
Seetha replied to her mother-in-law standing in front of her, as follows:-


"I shall do just all that, as your venerable self instructs me. I know how I should
behave towards my husband. I have also heard about it earlier."


"Your venerable self is not worthy of equating me with evil women. I am unable to
deviate from virtue, even as a moon from the moonlight"


"Vina (Indian lute) does not resonate without chords. Chariot does not move without
wheels. Now can a wife bereft of her husband, even if blessed with hundred children, will not lie
happily in comfort."


"A father indeed gives a limited extent, a mother in a limited measure and a son in
moderation. Which woman, then, would not adore her husband, the bestower of unlimitedness!"


"Having heard about the special and ordinary duties of a wife from the most
excellent women, how can I, as such, despise my husband, Oh venerable lady? Husband is indeed a
deity to women."


Hearing Seetha's words, which touched her heart, Kausalya of pure mind suddenly
started shedding tears born of agony and delight.


Rama, the most virtuous man, joining his palms, approached and spoke these words to
his mother, who is highly respected among all his mothers:


"Oh, mother! You do not grieve. You look after my father. The end of exile will come
rather soon."


"Fourteen years will elapse, while you are asleep. you as such, will see me, duly
arrived here in my entire being, surrounded by my well-wishers."


Uttering the aforesaid words of such quality and appropriate meaning to his mother,
Rama thought once again and gazed at his three hundred and fifty step-mothers.


Rama joined his palms and saluted those step mothers also, who were too distressed
in the same way and spoke these words which were in consonance with the spirit of
righteousness.


"Please excuse me, if I have done any mistake either becuase of our living together
or due to ignorance on my part. I now take leave of you all."


All those women, whose mind was overpowered with grief, heard the aforesaid cool
submission of Rama, which was in consonance with righteousness.


While Rama was speaking thus, an outery, resembling the wail of female cranes arose
from those wives of Dasaratha.


Dasaratha' s palace, which was earlier resounding with tomtoms, large drums and
Meghas( musical instruments which sound like rumbling of clouds) was now filled with wails and
cries and fallen on evil days.


Thus completes 39th chapter of ayodhya Kanda in glorious Valmiki Ramayana, the work
of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


When Rama thus kept silent after uttering those meaningful words as aforesaid, the
pious Bharata for his part addressed to virtuous Rama who was fond of people conformable to justice
at the banks of that River Mandakini.


"Who, in this world, is endowed with such qualities like you, O annihilator of
enemies! Neither does sorrow disturb you nor does joy enrapture you. You are highly honoured by
elders and you clarify your doubts from them.


"By what should he be moved, who looks on life and death, misfortune or prosperity
with an equal eye?"


"O, King! He who knows the totality of time as you do, ought not to feel despondent
even on meeting with adversity."


"O, the magnanimous Rama! you are equally strong as celestials. You are true to your
promise, all-knowing, all-viewing and endowed with understanding."


"Even the most fearful calamity ought not to attack you, endowed as you are, with
such attributes; and recognising the birth and end of all beings."


"The sinful deed, committed by my mean mother for my sake during my absence, was not
to my liking. (Hence) be gracious to me."


"I am bound by the chanins of morality. For that reason, I do not kill iwth a severe
punishment, my mother who was of perverse conduct and worthy of retribution."


"How can I, born of Dasaratha of noble birth and deeds and conversant of right and
wrong, do the most wicked and horrible act?"


"The King Dasaratha was my preceptor, had several sacrificial performances to his
credit was aged, was my father, equal to a deity and is now dead. Hence, I cannot reproach him in
an open assembly."


"O Rama the knower of piety! What man who knows the principles of righteousness,
would commit such an improper act, bereft of one's interest and duty, in order just to please a
woman?"


"There is an ancient saying that at the time of death, beings lose their judgment.
The king, acting as he did, has made this saying indeed true in the eyes of the world."


"This transgression of righteousness was done by our father for fear of anger (of
kaikeyi) or through infatuation and over-haste. You do keep in view a noble purpose and reverse
that transgression."


"A son who honours only a good deviation (from righteousness) of a father is
accepted as a real son in this world. He who acts otherwise than this would be facing a quite
reverse situation."


"You be that real son. Do not lend yourself to the infamous act, committed by our
father, which in this world, confident men freely condemn."


"Save Kaikeyi and me, our father, our friends, our relatives, all the urbanites and
the villagers as well as the entire kingdom."


"Where is the forest and where is the princely dignity? Where is the matted hair and
where is the protection of a kingdom? You ought not to do such a contradictory act."


"O, the highly enlightened hero! The first duty of a warrior is indeed to get
crowned, so that he may then protect his subjects."


"Which man of warrior-caste would set aside his manifest duty and prctise a virtue
that gives doubtful result, which does not promise happiness, which has a mental restraint and
which is uncertain?"


"If you desire to pursue a virtue alone; although born of pain, then take pains
while protecting the four castes as per tradition, by recourse to righteousness."


"O, Rama the knower of righteousness! The knower of what is right indeed tell that
the life of a house-holder is the noblest of all the four* stages of life. How can you abandon
it?"


"I am indeed junior to you in the point of learning, situation and by birth. How
should I rule the earth, while still you are living?"


"I, a mere child, who am devoted of intelligence and virtues besides placed in an
inferior position, cannot even live without you."


"O, Rama the knower of righteousness! Rule this entire kingdom belonging to your
father, without distraction, without hindrance and as per the conduct prescribed for you along with
your relatives."


"Let all the king's ministers along with Vasishta and other priests well-versed in
sacred formulas, crown you, the knower of sacred texts, here itself."


"You, having been crowned thus, may proceed to Ayodhya along with us to rule it,
like Indra the Lord of celestials, having conquered all the worlds with his might, proceeds to his
kingdom along with celestials."


"You shall discharge the three obligations subdue all the enemies, gratify the
wishes of all your friends and you alone rule me in Ayodhya."


"O, noble brother! May your friends rejoice today at your enthronement. May your
enemies, full of terror, flee today to the ten quarters."


"O, excellent among men! Wipe off my mother's curse today and protect our venerable
father from his sin."


"I request you by bowing my head before you. Show compassion on me and on all our
relatives as Lord Shiva ( the Supreme Deity) on all beings."


"Else if you disregard my entire request and move again into the forest form here, I
too will go along with you."


Even while being propitiated by Bharata as above, by bowing his head duly sinking in
his spirit, the illustrious Rama, the Lord of the earth was still abiding in the words of his
father and did not feel inclined to return to Ayodhya.


Seeing that wonderful staunchness in Rama, the people of Ayodhya felt sorrowful and
at the same time, experienced joy. They became distressed that he was not going to Ayodhya and felt
rejoiced to see his firmness of resolve.


The priests, citizens and elders of that multitude as well as Queens, distracted and
weeping bitterly, acclaimed Bharat who was then speaking thus, duly prostrating himself before Rama
and added theri supplications to Rama.

undefined

undefined

undefined


After hearing Jabali's words, Rama the best among virtuous and upright men spoke
with a great devotion and with an undisturbed mind of his own (as follows);


"That which, in your desire to please me, you have counselled, is impossible though
it appears to be possible. It is like a forbidden food, appearing to be an agreeable one."


"He who is unruly, fully invested with ill-conduct, having a bad reputation and
seeing differences in everything, does not gain respect from honest men."


"One's conduct itself explains whether one belongs to a good family or a bad family,
valiant or arrogant and chaste or unchaste."


"What sensible man, able to discern what is just and what is unjust, in this world,
would respect me, if I am ignoble resembling as noble, bereft of honesty, impure, having no good
qualities but appearing like the one having good qualities, ill-behaved but appearing as
well-behaved abandoning righteousness and getting hold of unrighteousness in the guise of piety,
creating confusion in the world and disregarding rules of conduct."


"If I behave in this manner faithlessly, to whom can I advise a prescribed conduct?
How would I attain heaven?"


"This entire world would follow its own whims, for, whatever the conduct of the
kings may be, such will be the coduct of their subjects."


"The eternal royal governance is indeed an assemble of truth and not cruel. Hence,
the kingship has the Truth as its essence. The world is established in Truth."


"Even sages and divine being have respected truthfulness alone. The one who speaks
truth obtains the highest position in this world."


"People fear of a person, who speaks untruth, as one fears a snake. Truth is the
highest virtue and is stated to be the origin of heaven."


"Truth is god and all virtues follow truth. All are rooted in truth there is nothing
higher than truth."


"Gift sacrifice, oblation, austerities performed and the scriptural texts have the
foundation in Truth. Hence, one should thoroughly surrender to truth.


"One rules over the world. One develops a race. One sinks into hell . One rises high
to heaven (according to one's degree of truthfulness practiced)."


"I am true to my promise. Why should I not fulfilll the command of my father, who
was a devotee of truth?"


"Neither covetousness nor forgetfulness nor pride would cause me to destroy the bond
of morality. I shall honour the vow made to my father."


"Neither gods nor the manes will accept the offerings of those who are wanting in
truth, unsteady and unstable in their minds. This is what is taught to us."


"I perceive this virtue i the form of truthfulness as a universal permeation of
spirit. That is why, this burden, observed as a vow, has been honoured by good men."


"I renounce the so-called duty of a warrior, it is injustice under the name of
justice, it is practised by petty cruel and covetous men of evil deeds."


"Sin is committed by the body after it has been conceived by the mind and falsehood
is spoken with the tongue. Thus, the degrading act is of three types (with body, mind and
tongue)"


"The earth, fame, prosperity and fortune indeed woo a man of truth. They constantly
oblige the truth: truth should therefore be strictly observed!"


"The logical words, you have made it out to be good, saying 'Do this good thing' as
uttered to me, are really unworthy."


"Having promised before my father about my exile to the forest, how can I fulfil
Bharata's words now, abandoning the father's words?"


"A firm promise has been made by me in the presence of my father, when Queen Kaikeyi
too became rejoiced."


"I will proceed with life-journey in this manner, by accepting this dwelling in the
forest, by remaining pure in body and mind, having controlled my diet, by feasting the Gods and
Ancestors with pure roots, flowers and fruits, with all my five senses fully sated, without any
deceit, fully devout and discriminative of what ought to be done and what ought not to be
done."


"Having reached this terrestrial globe (the realm of action), only a virtuous act is
to be undertaken. The god of fire, the wind-god and the moon-god reap the fruits of their
acts."


"Having performed ahundred sacrifices, Indra the Lord of celestials went to heaven.
Having practised severe austerities, the great sages went to heaven."


Hearing that argument of atheism inuntiated by Jabali, Rama the prince with a
terrible energy, without tolerating his words, spoke in reproach to him (as follows):


"The virtuous say that truth, piety, valour, compassion for all beings, polite
speech and worship of Brahmanas, gods and unexpected guests are the paths to heaven."


"Therefore the learned, well-instructed in what is to be their greatest advantage;
follow their purpose resolutely and fulfill their duty in its entirety properly and attentively,
seeking to attain the highest realms."


"I accuse the act done by my father in taking you into his service, you with your
misleading intelligence, a firm atheist fallen from the true path."


"It is an exact state of the case that a mere *intellection deserves to be punished
as it were a thief and know an atheist to be on par with a mere intellectual. Therefore he is the
most suspectable and should be punished in the interest of the poeple. In no case should a wise man
consort with an atheist."


"Men that lived before you have performed many auspicious acts, abandoning all hopes
of reward in this world as well as the next. Therefore, Brahmanas offer oblations in the sacred
fire and practise noble deeds."


"The sages who are devoted to righteousness, associating with men of virtue, endowed
with spiritual splendour, practising abundant charity, harm-less and washed free of all taint, are
honoured into the world."


"To the high-souled Rama, who never had self-pity and speaking indignantly as
aforesaid, Jabali (that brahmana) replied in a fitting manner in words that were beneficial and
truthful, which showed his belief in authority of Vedas, the other world and so on."


"I am not speaking the words of non- believers. I am not an atheist, nor is it a
fact that nothing exists whatsoever. Perceiving the time, I have become a believer. When the time
comes, I will become again just a non-believer."


"O, Rama! That and this time too came gradually. The words of a non-believer were
spoken by me for your sake, to pacify you and to persuade you to return to Ayodhya."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having brought his mothers back to Ayodhya; Bharata, fixed in his resolve but sore
stricken with grief, spoke to Vasishta and the elders (as follows)


"I am going to Nandigrama village. I take leave of all of you. There, I shall be
able to endure all this woe, occasioned by Rama's absence."


"The king Dasaratha went to heaven. My elder brother is in the forest. I shall await
for Rama to return to the kingdom; since verily he alone is the celebrated Lord of Ayodhya."


Hearing those auspicious words of the magnanimous Bharata, Vasishta the preceptor
and all the ministers spoke as follows:


"O, Bharata! The words which your have spoken by you in devotion to your brother are
very much appreciable. It is worthy of you alone."


"What man would not approve of the proposal of your highness, who are deeply
fascinated of your relative, always affectionate to your brother and devoted to the path of
elders?"


Hearing the affectionate words of his counsellors, who spoke according to his wish,
Bharata said to his charioteer, "Let my chariot be made ready!"


The illustrious Bharata, looking pleased and having offered salutation to all his
mothers, entered his chariot along with Shatrughna.


Both Shatrughna and Bharata, having quickly mounted the chariot and exceedingly
rejoiced, set out, accompanied by ministers and family-priests.


All the preceptors there, headed by Vasishta and other brahmanas being in the
forefront, proceeded eastward, in which direction Nandigrama village was situated.


When Bharata had left, the army too, abounding in elephants, horses and chariots
marched unbidden. The residents of the city also followed suit.


The magnanimous Bharata, affectionate of his brother, bearing the sandals belong to
Rama on his head, set out for Nandigrama.


Thereafter, having entered Nandigrama briskly Bharata descended his chariot quickly
and spoke to his preceptors as follows:


"My brother, Rama has given to me this kingdom as a trust. These sandals,
embellished with gold diffuse gain and security to the people."


Having dedicated the sacred trust to the wooden sandals, Bharata sore-stricken with
anguish, spoke to the entire body of his ministers as follows:


"Hold the state canopy speedily over these wooden sandals, which have been accepted
as symbols of the feet of Rama, my noble brother. By the presence of these wooden sandals of my
brother here, a piety has been established in the kingdom."


"As a mark of compassion, this trust has been placed at my disposal, by my brother.
There trust as such will be preserved till his return."


"Having restored these wooden sandals personally to Rama's feet immediately after
his return, I shall behold those feet of Rama along with these sandals."


"Restoring the kingdom to my elder brother, when re-united with him and thereby
laying down the burden, I shall then assume the role of a servant of my elder brother."


"By giving away these excellent wooden sandals, the symbols of trust, this kingdom,
as well as the City of Ayodhya to Rama, I shall be washed of all my sins."


"Rama will be installed and his subjects made happy. It will be a four-fold more
fame and happiness for me than that having obtained from the kingdom."


The highly illustrious Bharata though a distressed man, thus lamenting and pained,
looked after the state administration along with his ministers from Nandigrama.


Assuming bark robes and matted locks in the guise of an ascetic, the lord and the
hero Bharata dwelt in Nandigrama, protected by the army.


Bharata, obedient to his elder brother, affectionate of his brothers and faithful to
his vow, thus resided in Nandigrama, coronating the wooden sandals on the throne and wishing always
for the return of Rama.


Reporting all the royal orders to the wooden sandals, Bharata was holding the royal
canopy together with the chowrie to those sandals.


Coronating the wooden sandals of his elder brother, the illustrious Bharata
thereafter carried out the state administration, always maintaining his subservience to them.


Whatever a small affair of the state came up or whenever a high-valued gift was
offered, Bharata used to report that matter to the wooden sandals and then only dealt with it in
the proper way afterwards.

undefined

undefined

undefined


While Rama was thus speeding, Lakshmana heard, bowed down his head and got into the
midst of pain and pleasure effecting his mind again and again.


Lakshmana then firmed up his eyebrows and sighed with frown, like an angry snake
from its hole.


His wickedly looking face with eyebrows contracted, then appeared like the face of
an angry lion.


Seeing Rama with the tip of his eyes obliquely, Lakshmana spoke to him moving his
forehand like an elephant moving its trunk and causing his head to fall in oblique and upward
direction.


"Oh, the best of proud military community! This untimely great confusion is born in
you due to your conjecture of quilty righteousness and of non suspicion of the world. Can such a
person like you speak a person like you speak thus doubtlessly of the powerless destiny?"


"Why are you speaking about this weak and pitiable destiny? Why are you not doubting
the sinful Kaikeyi and Dasaratha?"


"Oh, the righteous sould! Both of them are smoothly deceiving in the name of
righteousness with an intent to keep away your good conduct, with selfish away your good conduct,
with selfish motive and by dishonest means. You are not knowing."


"Oh, Rama! If it was not indeed an earlier decision taken long ago by both of them,
the boon must have been given naturally even long ago."


"Enthroning other than yourself is not to the liking of the people. I cannot
tolerate this act that is started. Excuse me in this matter."


"Oh, Rama the great minded! This righteousness by which your intellect got disunited
and by which indulgence, you are stupefied, is disliked by me."


"you are capable of doing retaliatory action. How can you act on the word which is
reprehensible and which is unjustified of your father who is surrendering obediently to the will of
Kaikeyi?"


"Though they are doing this treachery with a sinful intent, I regret that you are
not grasping it. Such a conduct is to be censured."


"But of them, action on their own free will, were never desirous of your welfare.
They are enemies in the name of parents. It is not proper even to think of fulfilling their
desire."


"It may be your opinion that their action is influenced by mere destiny. Even then,
I do not like you to be indifferent to this also."


"Only a confused and cowardly person depends upon destiny. Brave men with
self-respect do not honour the destiny."


"That person who is capable of keeping off destiny by human effort, does not have
regret in the sense of not being failed by destiny."


"Today, all can see how much prowess is there in destiny and in man. This day, the
distinction between man and the destiny will be clearly perceived."


"By which destiny, your coronation is seen crushed, I shall crush that destiny by my
prowess. Let all people see it!"


"By my prowess, I shall turn back this destiny, as framing back an elephant which is
not caring a hook and which is fiercely running with violent force."


"Neither all the guardians of the world nor the three worlds put together can
withhold Rama's coronation today. Why to talk about father."


"Oh, King! Those who are secritlyadvocating you to live in a forest for fourteen
years, will have to reside in forest for fourteen years in that manner."


"That is why, I shall break down the hope of father and of Kaikeyi, who is trying
for kingdom to her son by creating obstacle to your coronation."


"The strength of destiny cannot create that much pain as that which my terrific
prowess will create to those who are opposed to my strength."


"At the end of a thousand years of your ruling the kingdom, you having gone to the
forest, your sons will govern the kingdom."


"It is indeed a practice for ancient kings to go to the forest after keeping care of
people, to be nourished as children, into the hands of their sons."


"If you think that you do not want kingdom because of your doubt that the kingdom
will get disturbed due to unstable mind of king Dasaratha, you need not fear. I am promising you. I
shall protect the kingdom as a sea coast protects the sea. If not, I will not obtain the heroic
world of heaven."


"You become engaged in getting coronated with auspicious things. I for one is
competent to ward off the kings by force."


"My arms are not meant for handsomeness alone. Bow is not for decoration. Sword is
not for tying around waist. Arrows are not for staying immobile. All these four are intended for
subduing enemies."


"I do not wish to tolerate too much the one who is considered as enemy to me. By
wearing a sword with sharp edge which is mavingly bright like lightening, I do not care any enemy,
even Indra himself. This earth will become impermeable, uninhabited with heads hands and thighs of
elephants horses and men crushed, having been hit by my sword."


"Now, elephants can fall down on earth, being hit by the gush of my sword, like
mountains in blaze, like clouds, savidyutaH = with flashes of lightening.


"As I stand holding a bow with fingers wound with shields made of allegator-skin,
how any man will fancy himself a hero among men?"


"While I overpower one with many arrows and many with a single arrow, I discharge my
arrows at vitals of men, horses and elephants."


"Oh, Lord! Today, the strength of my excellent arrows is capable of making you
sovereign and making Dasaratha devoid of power."


" Oh, Lord Rama! Today the effect of my weapons will remove the power from the king
Dasaratha and give the lordship to you."


"Oh, Rama! These arms worthy of wearing sandalwood essence and bracelets; for
bestowing riches and for protection of friends can today do every action to prevent the agents who
want to obstruct your coronation."


"Tell me now itself who your enemy be made deprived of life, honour and friendship,
by me. Command me so that how this earth will become your dominion. I am your servant.


Then, Rama spoke thus to Lakshmana after consoling him time and again by weeping off
his tears; "Oh, Lakshmana! I stand by the words of our father. This indeed is a good path."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having been thus wrongly preached by that sinful Manthara. Kaikeyi lied down on the
floor as a Kinnara woman beaten by a poisoned arrow.


The skilful Kaikeyi, after deciding in mind what ought to be done told it all slowly
to Manthara.


Being stupefied by the words of Manthara, that Kaikeyi became dejected, made firm
resolve, with deep and warm sigh, like a maiden-serpent and thought for that moment about the ways
which can lead to her happiness.


Manthara, who is Kaikeyi's companion and who is desirous of getting benefit, heard
of Kaikeyi's firm resolve and became very much pleased as if she achieved success.


Kaikeyi, being angry and well determined, lied down on the floor with eye brows,
knitted in her face.


Thereafter, she threw away her colourful chaplets and beautiful ornaments on to the
floor.


Those chaplets and ornaments which were thrown away by her were making the earth
shine, as stars to the sky.


Tying her single braid of hair tightly over her head and wearing soiled clothes,
that Kaikeyi lying down in the chamber of wrath was looking like a Kinnara woman lying down
dead.


King Dasaratha ordered for various arrangements to be made for Rama's coronation,
took permission to leave from the elders who were present there and entered his palace.


king Dasaratha, who kept all activates under his control entered into the inner
chambers to tell the good news of Rama's coronation to Kaikeyi who was a worthy woman to be told
the good news first (thinking that she has not yet heard the news).


That Dasaratha with vast glory entered Kaikeyi's chambers as moon enters the sky
with white clouds.


King Dasaratha entered his magnificent palace but could not find his beloved kaikeyi
on her best couch there. Peacocks and parrots were being reared in that palace, sounds of birds
like curlews, and swans were heard around. The place was resonant with sounds of musical
instruments. Short and hunch-backed maid-servants were moving here and there. There were bowers
surrounded with creepers and lovely champaka and Ashoka trees. There were painted rooms. There were
altars built with ivory, silver and gold. There were trees yielding flowers and fruits in all
seasons and wells in the middle. There were beautiful seats constructed with ivory, silver and
gold. Various types of food, drinks and snacks were made available. That palace was looking like
heaven with beautifully adorned women.


Being possessed of power of lust, that king who came with object of sexual pleasure,
was distressed in not finding his beloved wife and enquired the people there.


In former times, Kaikeyi did not keep away herself at that kind of hour, nor the
king enter her chambers at any time without her presence.


After entering the house, king Dasaratha enquired with the aid-servants there as
before, without knowing about foolish Kaikeyi who desired to get her selfish ends.


Then, a female door-keeper fearfully folding her hands in supplication, said: "Oh,
king! The queen ran to her chamber of wrath with much anger".


That Dasaratha having much disturbed mind already for the absence of Kaikeyi there,
became more dejected after hearing the words of door-keeper.


King Dasaratha, after seeing Kaikeyi lying down on floor in the chamber of wrath,
became tormented with grief.


That Dasaratha, who was sinless, a youthful woman dearer than his life, lying down
on the floor with an intent to do sin. At that time, she was looking like a completely uprooted
creeper, like a fallen angel, like a thrown down Kinnara woman, like an expelled divine dancer
Apsarasa, like a dropped off illusionism and like a female deer tied up in a net.


That Dasaratha touched Kaikeyi affectionately, as a great elephant in a forest
touches a female elephant which is wounded by poisoned arrow.


That Dasaratha, possessed with infatuation and having fearful mind, touched that
lotus-eyed woman with his hands and spoke the following words.


"Oh queen, of auspicious qualities! I do not know that you are angry with me. Who
has cursed or disrespected you? I am pained to see you resting in this way on a dirty floor."


"when I am here to expend all good to you, why are you hurting my mind by lying down
on the floor like the one who is possessed of a devil."


"There are so many royal physicians who are skilled and famous on all sides. They
can make you healthy. Tell me your sickness".


"To whom do you want a favour to be done? who has offended you? Tell me to whom I
have to extend a favour now and to whom I have to do a great offensive act."


"Oh, Kaikeyi! Do not weep and get your body dried up. If you tell, I shall kill a
person who is exempt from death or shall release a person who is worthy to be killed. I shall make
a poor man prosperous or a rich man, destitute".


"I and all my people are submissive to you. I do not wish to foil even a little of
your intention".


"Tell me that which is desired by your mind to be achieved even at the cost of my
life. You need not suspect me, as you very well know your authority over me. I keep my oath on my
righteousness that I shall certainly do whatever is liked by you".


My jurisdiction over this earth stretches out as much to the extent as to the extent
a chariot-wheel revolves. Eastern countries, Sindhu, Sauviira and Saurastra countries, as well as
countries in the south, Vanga, Anga, Magadha and Matsya countries, Kasi and Kausala countries are
all full of riches.


In those countries, gold and grain, sheep and goats and all types of goods are
produced. Oh, Kaikeyi! which of the goods do you want to acquire?


"Oh, fearful one! why are you exerted like this? oh, beautiful lady? Get up get up!
Oh, Kaikeyi1 Tell me the source of your fear. I shall remove that source as sun sets aside the
mist."


Consoled by hearing the words of Dasaratha, Kaikeyi intending to tell unkindly words
like Rama's exile was beginning to harass her husband further, by her words.

undefined

undefined

undefined


While Rama landed upon the southern shore, Guha conversed for a long time with
Sumantra and with much distress, went to his house.


It was gathered by those who were there (Guha and others) about Seetha, Rama and
Lakshmana coming to sage Bharadwaja, their staying with him in Prayaga and their departure to
Chitrakuta Mountain.


Sumantra, being allowed to depart by Rama, tied excellent horses to the chariot and
with intense anguish, rode towards the very city of Ayodhya.


Sumantra, seeing the sweet-smelling woods, rivers, lakes, villages and towns on the
way, soon crossed them.


Reaching Ayodhya in the evening time of the third day Sumantra saw that city,
joyless.


Beholding Ayodhya as if deserted in silence, Sumantra becoming very much distressed
in mind and having afflicted with intense anguish, surmised as follows:


"I hope the city of Ayodhya with its elephants, horses, people and the kings was not
burnt away by a fire of sorrow and blazing grief towards Rama.


Sumantra, thus lost in thought, reaching the city-gate through the fast-running
horses, entered the city quickly.


Meanwhile, seeing Sumantra the charioteer approaching, hundreds and thousands of
people ran towards him asking, "Where is Rama?"


He replied them thus: "Bidding farewell to Rama at the shore of Ganga when sent back
by that virtuous and high-souled Rama, I returned here."


Hearing that Seetha, Rama and Lakshmana had crossed River Ganga, the people with
their faces filled with tears sighed, "Oh, fie upon us! And cried aloud, "Alas, Rama!"


Sumantra also heard the words of those people standing in groups and telling, "Lost
indeed are we, who do not see Rama here!"


"Never again can we see the pious Rama on the occasions of bestowing gifts,
sacrificial performances or marriages or in large meetings.


The city of Ayodhya was protected by Rama, as by a father, with due regard to what
was appropriate, what was congenial and what brought happiness to its people.


While driving through bazaars, Sumantra heard the sounds of lamentation of women,
coming forth from windows, consumed by anguish on account of Rama's exile.


Going through the middle of the royal highway, Sumantra by covering his face,
reached the house of Dasaratha.


Sumantra descended from the chariot, entered quickly the royal palace and traversed
the seven inner apartments of the palace, filled with a large number of people.


Then, finding the forthcoming Sumantra from their large mansions, from seven-storied
buildings and from royal palaces, the women who had been emaciated in not being able to see Rama,
cried "Alas! Alas".


Those women, extremely confounded with grief with their long and bright eyes filled
with a stream of tears, looked at each other imperceptibly.


Sumantra also heard the feeble conversation of Dasaratha's wives absorbed in anguish
on account of Rama's exile, from their respective inner apartments.


"What Sumantra will reply to the lamenting Kausalya, when he now returns here
without Rama while he formerly went out with Rama?"


"In spite of her son (Rama) having left Ayodhya, Kausalya continues to survive. I
think that surely it is difficult thus to live and it is not so easy to preserve it too!"


Hearing those credible words of Dasaratha's wives, Sumantra all at once entered the
house, that appeared to be set ablaze with grief.


Sumantra entered the eighth inner apartment and saw in that white house, King
Dasaratha the miserable the sick and the exhausted man on account of the exhausted man on account
of the grief for his son.


Sumantra approached that king who was seated, offered his salutation and presented
Rama's message as told.


That king heard silently the message of Rama, was bewildered, afflicted by grief,
for his son, became fainted and fell on the ground.


The king thus having fainted, the gynaeceum was hurt. While the king was falling on
the ground, the inmates of gynaeceum wept, raising their hands in distress.


Kausalya along with Sumitra lifted up their husband, who fell on the ground.
Kausalya also spoke these words to Dasaratha.


"Oh, illustrious king! Why are you not speaking to this Rama's messenger who came
from the forest and who has done difficult things?"


"Oh, Dasaratha! After doing an evil act, you are now feeling shameful. Rise up! Let
it be a meritorious act for you. You cannot get a help, when you weep like this."


"Oh, king! On whose fear, you are not enquiring with Sumantra about the welfare of
Rama, that Kaikeyi is not here. Speak fearlessly."


Kausalya, speaking excitedly in tears and entirely given up to anguish uttered thus
to the monarch and soon fell to the ground.


All those women cried in loud voice, seeing Kausalya fallen on the ground weeping as
aforesaid and gazing their husband too (lying unconscious).


Hearing that crying sound raised in gynaeceum, all aged and young men and women on
all sides gathered around weeping. The city then again became disturbed.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Then, moving his head all of a sudden sighing again and again, rubbing his hand in
hand, grinding his teeth, turning his eyes red with anger shedding his normal colour, overwhelmed
with wrath, suddenly getting the evil grief, carefully reading Dasaratha's mind, sumantra the
charioteer spoke(as follows) as though shaking Kaikeyi's heart with sharp arrows, in the form of
thunderbolting words speedily peircing all her vitals.


"There is nothing on earth, anything which is most disgraceful for you by whom your
husband king Dasaratha the supporter of the entire creation the unmoving and the moving, is
betrayed, Oh, Kaikeyi!"


"King Dasaratha is unconquerable as great Indra, unshakable as mountain and
imperturbable as a great ocean. By tormenting him with your actions, you are considered by me as
murderess of your husband and ultimately the exterminator of your race too."


"Do not despise Dasaratha the supporter, the bestower of boons and your husband. For
women, will of the husband is superior to that of ten million sons."


"After death of a king, kingdoms are obtained as per the age of the princes. But,
you want to deprive this condition in the case of Rama the lord of Ikshvaku dynasty."


"Let your son Bharata become the king and rule the earth. wherever Rama goes, we (on
our part) shall go there".


"Now any brahmana cannot indeed dwell in your kigdom as now you want to do such an
act, transgressing the due limits."


"Certainly, all of us will proceed in the path followed by Rama. Oh, queen Kaikeyi!
What pleasure will be derived through attainment of soverignity, when your relatives, all brahmanas
and pious souls desert you forever? Now, you want to do such an act of impropriety"


"I am looking only with surprise, why the earth is not immediately rent asunder,
while you conduct yourself with such an act"


"It is also surprising me why rods of reproaching words fiery and fearful to look at
uttered by great brahmana sages are not killing you, who are bent on sending Rama to exile."


"Who will nurture a neem tree, cutting down a mango tree with an axe? And a neem
tree will not turn sweet for him who nourishes it with milk."


"I think, by birth your nature is as exactly as that of your mother. a proverb is
quoted in the world saying that honey does not ooze from a neem tree."


"We know, as heard of in the past, your mother's conduct of evil satisfaction.
Someone capable of giving boons, granted a great boon to your father. By that boon he could
identify the language of all created beings. The talk of those beings belonging to sub human
species could be known by him."


"From the sound of an ant called Jrimbha near his bed, the meaning of that sound was
deciphered by your exceedingly brilliant father and he laughed over it repeatedly."


Your mother, becoming angry over his laugh, wishing even to hand him to death(in
case he refuses to disclose the reason for his laughter), spoke thus: "Oh king, the gentle sir! I
want to know the meaning of your laughter."


"The king replied to that queen as follows: "Oh, royal lady! If I tell you the
reason of my laughter, my death will immediately follow thereafter. There is no doubt about
it."


"Your mother then said to your father, the king of Kekayas, Live or die as you will.
tell me the laughter. Do not ridicule me."


Having been spoken thus by his beloved consort, the said king of the Kekayas on his
part correctly reported the matter to the sage who had bestowed the boon on him.


Then the sage who had bestowed the boon replied to the king as follows: "Oh, lord of
the earth! Let her die or ruin. Do not reveal the reason to her."


"Having heard the words of that sage who was pure-minded, the king repudiated your
mother and lived happily like Kubera the Lord of riches."


"Oh, Kaikeyi, seeing evil everywhere! You, too, thus following the path trodden by
wicked men, are making this bad resolution by ignorance."


"The popular saying that males are born confirming to their fathers and females to
their mothers, occurs to me as true."


Do not conform to the traits of your mother. Understand that which is said by the
king. following the desire of your husband, be a protectress to these people here."


"Incitedby the evil minded, do not put before the public an improper course of
conduct of your husband who spendour is equal to that of king Devendra and who is a protector of
this world.


"Oh, Kaikeyi! Dasaratha the faultless man, the majesty, the lotus-eyed man and the
king cannot indeed belie the promise given to you(Hence, you alone has to change your opinion)"


"Let Rama the eldest(of the sons) who is generous strong skilled, capable of
protecting his own duty as Kshatriya but also of protecting the world of living beings, be
installed on the throne of Ayodhya"


"Oh, Kaikeyi! A great accusation will surely roam about you in the world, if Rama
leaving his royal father goes to the forest.


"Let Rama of that character protect this kingdom! Be you free from distress. There
is none other than Rama living in your excellent city who is competent to rule this Ayodhya"


"In the event of Rama being installe din the office of the prince Regent, King
Dasaratha wielder of the great bow will surely have recourse to the forest, cherishly recollecting
the conduct of his forebears"


Thus, Sumantra repeatedly with joint palms, caused a shaking to Kaikeyi in the royal
assmebly, by his kind words as well as bitter words.


That queen Kaikeyi, however, was neither excited nor repented in her heart nor was
any change observed in the colour of her face.


Thus completes 35th chapter in Ayodhya Kanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Eager to see Rama again, Vasishta approached that place, preceded by Dasaratha's
wives.


The king's wives, while moving slowly towards River Mandakini, saw the ford there,
being frequented by Rama and Lakshmana.


With a gloomy and emaciated face, filled with tears, Kausalya spoke to Sumitra and
other royal women (as follows):


"This is the ford, located in the eastern region of the forest, frequented by
Seetha, Rama and Lakshmana, banished from the kingdom; those unfortunate persons of illustrious
exploits who have no country."


"O, Sumitra! Lakshmana, your son always draws water himself from here unwearyingly
for the sake of my son."


"Through engaged in an inferior act (of carrying water), your son is not to be
censured because all that service rendered to his brother is enjoined with virtues."


"Your son too, who is not accustomed to such pains, will indeed be relived now of
this mean, wretched and laborious task."


The large-eyed Kausalya observed a ball made of Ingudi pulp, which was placed by
Rama in honour of his father on the ground, on aheap of Darbha grass, the raised spikes of which
pointed towards the south.


Seeing that ball of food placed on the ground by the unfortunate Rama for his
father, the Queen Kausalya spoke to all those wives of Dasaratha (as follows):


"See this ball of food offered traditionally by Rama in honour of his father, the
high-souled Dasaratha the Lord of Ikshvaku race."


"I do not consider this offering as befitting for that great-souled king, who was
like unto a God and who lived amidst every pleasure."


"How can that Lord of the earth, Dasartha, equal to the Lord of celestials and a
mighty man, having enjoyed the earth with its four quarters, the boundaries of which are the
oceans, eat a cake of Ingudi pulp?"


"I do not consider any thing painful to me on earth than when Rama the man of
fortune offering a cake of Ingudi pulp to his father."


"Seeing this offering, a cake of Ingudi pulp, of Rama to his father, why does my
heart not break into a thousand pieces with anguish?"


"It indeed occurs to me that the saying among men that the food eaten by man is also
consumed by his Gods is true."


Consoling Kausalya thus afflicted by grief, Kausalya's companions then proceeded
further and saw Rama in his hermitage, who resembled an Immortal driven out of Paradise.


Beholding Rama bereft of all enjoyments, his mothers agonized as they were with
grief, emitted cries and allowed tears to flow.


Rama, the tiger among men, true to his promise raised up and took hold of the
auspicious feet of all his mothers.


Those large-eyed Queens, by means of their pleasantly touching soft fingers and
palms as well as charming hands, wiped the dust from Rama's back.


Seeing all those mothers, the wailing Lakshmana too slowly paid obeisance devotedly
to them all by bowing to each in turn, immediately after Rama.


All Dasaratha's wives manifested the same affection towards Lakshmana, who was born
of Dasaratha and exceedingly handsome, as they did to Rama.


Then, the grief-stricken Seetha, her eyes filed with tears, also touched the feet of
her mothers-in-laws and stood before them.


Kausalya embraced the miserable Seetha as a mother her daughter, she who was
emaciated because of her stay in the forest and afflicted with grief, and spoke the following
words:


"How has the daughter of King Janaka, the daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha and
Rama's wife, fallen into such a wretched plight that she is living in a desolate forest?"


"O, Seetha! Seeing your face, like a lotus withered with heart or a faded lily or
gold defiled with dust or a moon hidden by the clouds, the fire of grief produced by the firewood
of adversity and existing in my mind burns me severely."


While the sorrowful mother was speaking thus, Rama the elder brother of Bharata
approached Vasishta and took hold of his feet in salutation.


Then, Rama holding the feet of that priest, who was equal of Agni the fire and
endowed with very great splendour, even as Indra the Lord of celestials would clasp the feet of
Brihaspati, sat down by his side.


Then, after Rama and Vasishta sat, Bharata the pious man along with his counsellors,
the leading citizens, warriors and virtuous people seated himself at a lowel level at a proximity
to Rama.


Seeing Rama in the garb of an ascetic, radiant in majesty, the extremely powerful
Bharata, paying obeisance to him with joined palms, then took his place in his presence, as the
devoted Indra the Lord of celestials sits before Brahma the Lord of creation.


A highest curiosity arose in the minds of those worthy men (assembled there) as to
what persuasive words Bharata at that moment would utter, while addressing Rama, having offered
salutation and homage to him.


That Rama endowed with truth and forbearance with Lakshmana who was bestowed with
magnanimity and the pious Bharata, surrounded by his companions, were as resplendent as the three
sacrificial Fires (known by the names of Garhapatya, Ahavamiya and Dakshina), accompanied by the
superintending priests.

undefined

undefined

undefined


That night in Ayodhya, which was joyless in a weeping tone and thronged with people
with tears in their throats, slowly passed over.


At sunrise, when the night had passed over, the Brahmins who place a king on the
throne, together gathered at the assembly.


Markandeya, Moudgalya, Vamadeva, Kasyapa,Katyayana, Goutama and the greatly famous
Jabali-all these Brahmans together with the ministers turned towards the excellent royal priest
Vasishta and one by one spoke as follows:


"King Dasaratha having obtained death due to grief born of separation from his sons
(Rama and Lakshmana), the night which burdened like a hundred years, has passed over with great
difficulty."


"The monarch has gone to heaven. Rama took retreat in a forest. The brilliant
Lakshmana followed suit and went along with Rama."


"Both Bharata and Satrughna, the annihilator of enemies, are encamped in the
beautiful house of their maternal uncle in the city of Rajagriha in the kingdom of Kekaya."


"Hence, let anyone here in Ikshvaku dynasty be made a king today itself lest our
nation without a king should result in a collapse indeed."


"Lightning clouds in the sky with a great noise of thunder, will not yield rain on
the land in a country without a king."


"Even a fist of seeds are not disbursed in a ruler- less land. In anarchy, even a
son is not amenable to the control of a father nor a wife in the authority of her husband."


"In a rulerless land, there is no wealth. Where there is no king, there is no
(faithful) wife. Another very dangerous thing is there. In a ruler less territory, how can there be
truth? "


"In a ruler- less country, people do not cause to make a delightful assembly nor
erect beautiful parks or temples."


"In a ruler- less territory, those who frequently perform sacrificial rites, those
who have self-restraint, those who firmly adhere to a vow as well as Brahmins do not carry out Soma
sacrifices."


"In a rulerless land, Brahmans who obtained wealth and sacrificers in great
sacrificial rites do not bestow proper gifts"


"In a ruler- less territory, festivals and gatherings exalting the kingdom in which
actors, and dancers exhibit their talents are not frequently arranged"


"In a ruler less land, litigants do not get their disputes settled and persons who
have a knack for narrating stories do not gratify story- lovers with their tales."


"In a ruler less territory, girls adorned in gold do not go together to parks to
play there in the evening."


"In a lord less land, lustful men do not go out to woods with ladies in speedily
moving vehicles"


"In a lord less land, rich people living on agriculture and cattle rearing do not
sleep in their abodes well protected, with their doors open"


"In a land without emperor, sixty year old elephants with bells tied around their
tusks, do not roam around on royal high ways


"In a ruler less land, the noise of plucking the bow string with the palm, produced
by archers continuously discharging arrows while practicing the use of their bows, is not
heard."


"In a rulerless land, traders who go to distant places, carrying with them several
merchandises, cannot travel safely in their voyages."


"In a rulerless land, a monk who wanders alone, who has subdued his senses, who
mediates himself on the soul and who takes up an abode wherever evening overtakes him, cannot roam
around the city."


"In a rulerless land; gain and security are not duly established. In anarchy, army
cannot conquer enemies in battle."


"In a rulerless land, people beautifully adorned, cannot go fast cheerfully in
excellent horses and chariots."


"In a rulerless land, persons skilled in sacred treatises cannot sit speaking
together in forests and groves."


"In a rulerless land, floral garlands, sweet-meats and gifts for the sake of
offering to the deities, are not arranged by the appointed persons."


"In a rulerless land, royal princes smeared with paste of sandal and aloe-wood do
not figure brilliantly like trees in a spring time."


"A rulerless country is like the water less rivers, like the lawn less garden and
like the cowherd less cows."


"A flag is an identity for a chariot. A smoke is an identity for a fire. King
Dasaratha, like a flag, was an identity for us and he has left the world for a heavenly abode."


"In a rulerless land, there is no one's own property for any one. Like fishes,
persons always eat away each other."


"The atheists, who were separated from their right path and who had been tormented;
with punishment earlier by the king, are now without fear and are able to exercise their old
temperament (due to anarchy)"


"As the eye sight is helpful regularly for a proper setting -in-motion of the body,
so also a king is the cause of existence for truth and righteousness of a country."


"The king is truthfulness and righteousness personified in him. In a race, he
belongs to a noble family. The king is a mother and a father. The king is a benefactor to
people."


"Hence, Yama (the god of Death); Kubera (the god of riches), Indra (the ruler of
celestials) and the very mighty Varuna (the Lord of Waters) are outstretched by the a high and
eminent conduct."


"Alas! If a king is not there in the world, with his power of discrimination between
good and evil, this world will be dark and nothing will be clearly perceived."


"Even when the emperor was alive, we all of us did not transgress your words, only
any more than an ocean transgresses its coast."


"O, the excellent Brahmana! After renewing the circumstances here and seeing that
the kingdom is becoming a jungle without a king, you yourself anoint a youth born in Ikshvaku race
or anyone here as a king."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, the king when recovered from loss of consciousness and again returned to
his breath, he called that charioteer for the purpose of getting the report on Rama.


Then, Sumantra, who joined his palms in reverence, approached the monarch who was
repenting about Rama alone, filled with pain and sorrow, advanced in age, greatly anguished,
sighing like a newly caught elephant and reflecting on something as a sick elephant.


The king, having great distress, spoke to Sumantra, whose body was covered with
dust, his face filled with tears, who was miserable and who approached near him (as follows):


"Oh, Sumantra! Where can Rama the virtuous man abide, taking refuge at the root of a
tree? What that Rama, who enjoyed very many pleasantries, can eat now?"


"Oh, Sumantra! How can Rama the prince, who was habituated to good beds, sleep with
such discomfort on a floor like an orphan?"


"Foot soldiers, Chariots and elephants used to follows whenever Rama was marching
ahead. How such a man can take shelter and stay in a forest devoid of people?"


"How Seetha Rama and Lakshmana entered forest filled with wild animals and black
snakes?"


"Oh, Sumantra! How those princes with Seetha the delicate and the poor lady went on
foot, after descending from the chariot?"


"Oh, Sumantra! You have seen my sons entering the forest, as though divinities of
Aswini had entered the Mountain-range of Mandara. You are indeed lucky."


"Oh, Sumantra! After reaching the forest, what words did Rama speak? What did
Lakshmana speak? What did Seetha speak?"


"Oh, charioteer! Tell me where Rama sat, slept and took food. By hearing these
things, I shall survive, as Yayati survived in the company of saints."


As asked thus by the king, Sumantra spoke to the emperor in a voice quivering and
choked with tears (as follows).


"Oh, emperor! Rama, keeping up the prescribed course of conduct, making salutation
with joined palms and bowing his head in reverence to you, spoke to me as follows:"


"Oh, charioteer! Tell my salutations to my father, the one with a remarkable
intellect, a mighty soul and the one to be respectfully greeted."


Oh, charioteer! Enquire about the health of all the people in the gynaeceum without
any disparity and offer my appropriate salutations to them.


My mother Kausalya is to be told about my welfare, about my offering salutations to
her and about my meticulousness.


"Oh, godly lady! Be always righteous and be interested in offering worship and
sacrifices as per the prescribed timings in the House of Fire worship. Nurture the feet of the Lord
Dasaratha, like with a god."


"Oh, mother! Behave towards my other mothers, abandoning self-conceit and
indignation. Make the venerable Kaikeyi, agreeable to the king."


"In respect of Bharata your son, follow a respectable behaviour as with a king.
Kings are indeed sovereign in substance. Remember the rules relating to kings."


"Bharata is to be enquired about his well-being and he is also to be informed as
follows: "Follow good behaviour indeed judiciously towards all your mothers."


"The mighty armed Bharata the son of Ikshvaku race, is to be told as follows: Being
installed in the office of Prince Regent, attend to your father who still stays in the
throne'."


"The king has crossed his age. But do not depose him on that score. By proceeding
according to the orders of the king, you live as a prince."


"Shedding tears profusely, Rama again spoke to me as follows : My mother, who is
very much longing her son, is to be looked after by you as if she is your mother'."


"Oh, emperor! Rama of the most beautiful appearance with red eyes resembling red
lotus flowers, while even uttering these words to me profusely shed tears."


"But Lakshmana was very angry and breathing a sigh, spoke to me as follows: On
which offence this prince was expelled from home?'"


"The king even took shelter under a wretched decree of Kaikeyi and performed an act
not to be done, as though it is a proper deed, for which we are now tormented."


"Even if this was done for the good pleasure of the king or through the will of God,
I do not see any justification for Rama's abandonment."


"Even if this was done for the good pleasure of the king or through the will of god,
I do not see any justification for Rama's abandonment."


"Rama's exile, an illegal decision undertaken whether due to levity of judgment or
due to lack of reflection, will raise countless protests."


"I do not consider the emperor as my father. For me, Rama is the brother, lord,
relative and my father."


"Leaving Rama the beloved of all people and who is interested in the welfare of all
human beings, how would all these people would be interested in you by this act of yours?"


"By banishing Rama who is delightful to entire people and who is a virtuous man and
by opposing all this entire world, how will you stay as a king?"


"Oh, King! The wise Seetha for her part with her mind like one possessed and
forgetting her own existence, stood sighing and static.


"The illustrious Seetha having not seen such misfortune earlier, could not even to
speak me anything, weeping as she was with that uneasiness."


"Seeing me going back, Seetha with emaciated face, perceiving her husband, soon shed
down tears."


"In the same way, Rama with tears on his face and with joined palms, stood being
shielded by the arms of Lakshmana. The miserable Seetha in the same manner was weeping and seeing
the royal chariot and me."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Rama and Lakshmana along with Seetha gave away abundant riches to brahmanas and went
along with Seetha to see their father.


Those weapons held by Rama and Lakshmana were tied on with garlands by Seetha. The
weapons thus decorated were shining brilliantly and were fearful to look at.


Then, wealthy people ascended lofty palatial mansions, large buildings and tops of
palaces of seven stories high and saw them spiritlessly,


The streets were indeed difficult to walk, congested as they were, with many men.
For that reason, being in distress, they were seeing Rama by ascending lofty palatial
buildings.


Then, by seeing Rama as a pedestrian without an umbrella, the people with their
hearts struck by grief were uttering words of many sorts.


The same Sri Rama who was followed by a strong four wings of army(comprising
elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry), is walking lonely with Seetha followed by
Lakshmana.


Rama knew the taste of sovereignty. He can grant desires to the desirous. Even then,
because of his respect for virtue, he is careful not to believe his father's words.


Even people walking on road are able to see Seetha, who could not earlier be seen
even by beings going through the air.


Rain, heat and cold will quickly wane to pallor Seetha, who was fond of applying
suitable cosmetics and red sandal to the body.


How banishment can be affected on a son, even devoid of virtues? Why to tell further
of whom, this world is conquered merely by his mode of conduct?


Harmlessness, compassion, learning, good nature, self-control and tranquillity -
these six virtues adorn Rama, the best of men.


Therefore, people are extremely painful for the injury done to him, as aquatic
beings in summer are afflicted because of depletion of water.


The entire world feels afflicted by the hardship inflicted on this protector of the
world, as a tree which acquired flowers and fruits is damaged by injury caused to its root.


This Rama, the essence of virtue possessing great lustre, is indeed the root of the
tree of humanity. Other men are his flowers, fruits and branches.


We as such along with our wives and relatives atone will follow Rama in the same way
as Lakshmana is going with the departing Rama.


Abandoning gardens fields and houses, we shall follow Rama the righteous man, and
share his joys and sorrows.


Let Kaikeyi obtain the houses deserted by us, their treasures unearthed, their
court-yards in ruined state, their wealth and food grains removed, their best parts robbed off from
all sides, covered by dust, deserted by the deities(presiding them), overrun by mice, coming out of
their holes and turning round here and there, without water and smoke, upswept, the rises of
offering oblations to all creatures as well as the sacred fire, worship of gods, the chanting of
sacred texts and muttering of prayers having altogether ceased, as though dilapidated by adverse
times and scattered with broken vessels.


As Rama is going away to the forest, let that forest become a city and let this city
being deserted by us become a forest.


Scared by fear of us, let all the snakes abandon their holes, the dears and birds
the mountain peaks, the elephants and the lions the forest itself. let them leave the region going
to be inhabited by us and reach the city of Ayodhya.


Let Kaikeyi with her son along with her relatives indeed inhabit the region where
ferocious animals and vultures live with grass, meat and fruits. Let us all (on the other hand)
live happily in the forest along with Rama.


Rama heard various kinds of remarks thus made by many people. Hearing them also, his
mind was not disturbed.


That Rama the virtuous man, by walking with strides of an elephant in rut,
approached his father's palace, which from a distance glowed like a peak of the Kailasa
mountain.


After entering the royal palace, which had in it disciplined and valiant attendants,
saw Sumantra standing dejected not far from the palace.


The, Rama even on seeing the people disturbed, appeared unmoved and smiling,
intending to fulfill his father's behest and went to see his father.


Seeing Sumantra appearing disturbed before that, Rama the son of Dasaratha( a scion
of Ikshhvaaku) whose mind is mighty and who is setting out to the forest, waited awhile to have his
presence announced to his father.


That Rama, who had passion towards piety, having made up his mind positively to
enter the exile as per his father's command, spoke thus, seeing Sumantra, "Inform my arrival to the
king."


Thus completes 33rd chapter of Ayodhya Kanda in glorious Ramayana, the work of a
sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Hearing that great story, Anasuya the knower of piety kissed Seetha's forehead and
hugged her in her arms.


"It was narrated sweetly and amazingly by you, in clear words and syllables. It has
been indeed heard by me how all that Svayamvara, the process of self-choosing marriage took place.
O, the sweet speaking Seetha! I am overjoyed by hearing your story."


"O, Fortunate One! While the auspicious night drawing near, the sun has sunk below
horizon. The twittering of the birds can be heard, who, through the day, have sought their
nourishment far and wide and are seeking their shelter for sleep at the time of
evening-twilight."


"These ascetics too are returning together, their bark-robes drenched from bathing,
and with uplifted vessels, wet with sprinkled water on them."


"From the sacred fire kindled by the sages, according to the scriptural ordinance, a
column of smoke with the hue of a Pigeon's neck, raised by the wind, is seen there."


"Thought their foliage is sparse, the trees look dense all around. The quarters of
the world, by whom the senses are drawn apart, do not shine brilliantly at this place."


"The animals who wander about at night are ranging everywhere. The deer of the
hermitage are sleeping round the sacred altars."


"O, Seetha! The night richly adorned with stars has set well in motion. The moon
encircled with light is seen rising in the sky."


"Go now. I give you leave. Be a female companion to Rama. Your sweet conversation
has charmed me."


"O, Seetha! O, Dear child! Adorn (with ornaments and apparel gifted by me_ before my
eyes and cause delight to me in embellishing yourself with heavenly jewels."


Then Seetha, adorning herself, resembled the daughter of a god, and making obeisance
to the feet of Anasuya, she went forward to meet Rama.


Rama, the most eloquent one, saw Seetha adorned as aforesaid and felt delighted over
the charming gifts of the ascetic.


Seetha, the daughter of Mithila kingdom then showed to Rama all the apparel, jewels
and garlands the affectionate gifts of Anasuya the hermitess.


Seeing the respectful treatment, received by Seetha, which was very rare among human
beings, Rama and Lakshmana the great car-warrior felt highly rejoiced.


Thereupon, Rama with his face resembling the moon, having been honoured by the holy
ascetics, was delighted and spent that auspicious night there.


While that night passed away, Rama and Lakshmana the tigers among men finished their
ablutions and took leave of the ascetics dwelling the forest, who had just poured oblations into
the sacred fire.


Those ascetics dwelling in the forest and practising virtue told Rama and Lakshmana
about the region of that forest, which was infested with demons (as follows):


"O, Rama! Various forms of man-eating demons and beasts drinking the blood are
living in this great forest."


"O, Rama! They devour an ascetic or a celibate, who has not rinsed his mouth after
finishing his meal or who is inattentive in this great forest. (Pray ward them off!"


"O, Rama! Here is the path of the great sages, through which they fetch the fruits
in this forest. It is appropriate for you to go by this path in this dangerous forest."


Thus addressed by those Brahmanas having great asceticism, who, with joined palms
paid obedience to him and blessed his journey, Rama the harasser of his foes entered the forest
with his consort along with Lakshmana, as sun enters a mass of clouds.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, the illustrious Rama, highly respected among his fraternity, (as
follows) to Bharata who was speaking as aforesaid among his relatives.


"These words, which you have spoken are worthy of you, the son of Dasaratha the
excellent king, born through Kaikeyi."


"O, My brother! Long ago, when our father married your mother, he promised your
maternal grandfather that he would confer his kingdom as an exceptional marriage-dowry"


"Thereafter, in a conflict between Gods and demons, your mother received the promise
of two boons from the efficient lord of the earth, King Dasartha, as a token of his joy and
gratitude."


"O, Tiger among men! Your illustrious mother of beautiful complexion consequently
demanded these two boons from that cheif of men, for you the throne and for me the exile to the
forest."


"O, excellent among men! I too, have been enjoined by our aforesaid father to live
here in the forest for fourteen years, in accord iwth granting of boon."


"I as such, without any rival, have come to this lonely forest accompanied by
Lakshmana and Seetha in order to carry out the promise given by our father."


"You too ought, likewise, to make our father, as a person having given a true
promise, O Indra (the Lord of Celestials) among kings, by getting yourself anointed to the crown
without any delay.


"O, Bharata! For my sake relieve the mighty king from his vow and make both our
mother and fahter happy."


"My dear brother! Formerly, an illustrious king named Gaya, while perfoming a
sacrifice in a place called Gaya in honour of his ancestors, chanted the following verse:


"Since a son delivers his father from a place of torment (hell) called 'Put', he is
named as 'Putra'- 'he who delivers his ancestors from all dangers'"


"To have many virtuous and learned sons is to be desired, since one, atleast among
them, who is intimately connected will ocme to Gaya to perform a sacrifice."


"O, prince! This is the conviction of all the royal sages. O, the efficient and the
excellent of men! Therefore, save our father from hell.


"O, the valiant Bharata! Go to Ayodhya along with Shatrughna and all the Brahmanas
and give joy to the people there."


"O, King! I too, without delay, will proceed to Dandaka forest along with Seetha and
Lakshaman."


"O, Bharata! You become the Lord of men. I will become the emperor of the wild
beasts of the forest! Return now to the excellent city of Ayodhya full of joy and I also full of
joy will enter Dankada Forest!"


"O, Bharata! Let the (royal) white umbrella provide a cool shadow for your head,
repulsing the rays of sunlight. I will take shelter comoftably under the abundant shadow of these
forest-trees."


"O, Bharata! The wise Shatrughna is helpful to you. Lakshmana is known to be an
outstanding friend for me. We, the four excellent sons, will ultimately make the king true to his
promise. Do not get disappointed."

undefined

undefined

undefined

Those brahmans skilled in Vedas stayed there all the night and arrived at a nearby place 
along with the royal priest, Vashishta.

Ministers, army chiefs, prominent leaders of the city assembled there, welcoming the 
cause of Rama's coronation.

The best of brahmanas were prepared to do Rama's coronation in day-time after the sun 
rises clearly at the arrival of Pushya star and on arrival of Rama's auspicious birth time of Cancer.

Golden water-pots, well-decorated throne and chariot covered well by shining tiger-skin 
were impressive.

Water was brought from auspicious conjunction of rivers ganga and Yamuna, from other 
rivers, lakes, wells, ponds, from streams flowing eastwards, from streams which joined together and 
from oceans in all sides.

Gold and silver pots filled with best water together with popped grain and covered by 
milky sapped leaves, lotuses and water-lilies were shining there.

Honey, curd, clarified butter popped grain, sacred grass, flowers and milk were kept 
ready. Harlots adorned with all types of ornaments were also glimmering there.

An excellent fly-flopper which was like spread-out rays of moon, made of gold, adorned 
with diamonds was kept ready for Rama.

A white umbrella like circular moon, which was kept in advance for the occasion of coronation 
was also kept ready.

A white bull, a white horse a mighty and beautiful elephant which was fit to be mounted 
by kings were readily waiting.

Eight auspicious virgins adorned all types of ornaments, various types of musical instruments, 
panegyrists and others were also waiting.

The people who gathered there after getting the things required as per orders of king 
for coronation ceremony to be held in a kingdom of Ikshhvaaku dynasty, could not sight the king and 
discussed among themselves about how to inform the king regarding their arrival.

" The king is not being seen. The sun has risen. Everything is ready for the coronation 
of Rama, the wise".

Sumantra, who received good respect from Dasaratha, heard them thus speaking and addressed 
those kings, who came from different countries.

"I am going to Rama quickly as per king's directions. But, you are all worthy of worship 
by Dasaratha and by Rama in particular."

"I shall ask as your word about the well-being of king who is now awake and also about 
the reason of his not coming here."

That Sumantra, knower of sacred works spoke thus, approached entrance of royal palace 
and entered the inner quarters which is always kept closed.

He entered the inner quarters and praised the king's dynasty. He approached the royal 
bedroom and stood there at a distance.

He entered the bedroom, approached nearer to the curtain there and praised Dasaratha's 
qualities with blessings.

"Oh, king Dasaratha! Let sun and the moon, guardians of the world like Shiva and Kubera, 
Varuna, Agni and Indra grant victory to you!"

"Oh, the best of kings! The venerable night has gone. The auspicious day has come. Wake 
up and do whatever needs to be done thereafter."

"Oh, king Dasaratha ! Brahmanas, chiefs of armed forces and traders are waiting to see 
you. Please wake up."

Then, Dasaratha woke up and spoke these words to Sumantra, who was eulogising him, who 
was skilled in giving advice and who was his charioteer.

"Why have you not followed my orders even though you were asked by her to bring Rama."

King Dasaratha ordered that charioteer there again thus - " I am not sleeping. Bring 
Rama here soon".

He listened to king's words, bowed his head in salutation to him, thought for goodness 
of king, and came out of the king's palace.

That Sumantra with placid mind, went happily seeing the royal roads adorned with flags 
and banners.

Sumantra heard the words pertaining to Rama and Rama's coronation spoken together by 
joyful people there.

Then, Sumantra saw Rama's palace which was lovely shining like top of a mountain and 
radiant like Indra's palace.

Rama's palace was beautiful with large doors and adorned with hundreds of raised quadrangular 
seats. There were festooned decorations over doorways with gems and corals. It was adorned with various 
precious stones and the best of garlands. Pearls were scattered all over abundantly. It was decorated 
with sandal and aloe woods, spreading out beautiful smells like the peak of a Darddura Mountain. Cranes 
and peacocks were singing sweetly. Figures of wolves and other art forms were sculptured here and there. 
It was attracting the eyes and minds of living beings by its brilliance. It was shining like a constellation 
of moon and the sun. It was full of various kinds of birds. It was as high as Meru mountain. Sumantra 
saw such a palace of Rama. People who came from different rural parts to see Rama's coronation were 
waiting with different gifts in their hands. That house decorated with various diamonds, was looking 
high like a great cloud. Hunch backed servants and servants of kirata tribe were moving all over the 
house.

That Sumantra with chariot fastened with horses and having a top, approached towards 
Rama's palace, beautifying the human and the royal races, gladdened the hearts of all citizens.

That palace of the great souled Rama was like Indra's palace with great wealth. It was 
filled with various deer and peacocks. After approaching that palace, he became quite thrilled.

The inner apartments of Rama's palace were well decorated, high as Kailasa mountain and 
like abodes of deities. Sumantra entered there, passed over many of Rama's friends who well wishers 
and approached Rama's inner apartment.

There, Sumantra heard delightful people talking about Rama's coronation and the rites 
to be performed for the sake of Rama's prosperity.

Rama's palace was as high as top of the Meru mountain, shining with radiance. The mansion 
was filled with birds and antelopes. It was like Indra's mansion. Sumantra saw such a beautiful house 
of Rama.

He saw crores and millions of rural folk and other people with folded hands approaching 
the area leaving their respective vehicles.

There he saw a beautiful elephant called Satrunjaya with highly elevated body and Rama's 
royal conveyance. It was like a great cloud and a mountain. It was intoxicated, uncontrollable and intolerable.

The ministers in chief who were beloved to the king, were well-adorned and came there 
on horse-carriages and elephants. Sumantra passed over the people gathered there on all sides and entered 
the rich inner apartment.

Then, that Sumantra entered Rama's palace, which was like top of a mountain, like an 
unmoving cloud, which contained houses equal to excellent divine cars, like crocodile entering the ocean 
containing a number of precious stones. Nobody obstructed him.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having traveled the extensive and beautiful Kosala territory and standing with his
face turned towards Ayodhya, the wise Rama with joined palms spoke the following words:


"I bid farewell to you, Oh best of the cities, carefully protected by Dasaratha born
in Kakutstha dynasty, as well as of the deities who protect you and dwell in you."


"After getting relieved from exile in the forest and thus freed from the debt to the
emperor, I shall see you again, duly getting united with my mother and father."


Lifting his right arm and wearing a woeful look, his face covered with tears, Rama
possessing lovely reddish eyes, spoke them to the people hailing from the countryside.(as follows)
:


"Mercy and compassion according to my worth (in your view) have been shown to me by
you. Keeping agony for a long time is undesirable. Let each return to accomplish your desired
object(attending to your house-hold work)!"


Respectfully saluting the high soled prince and going round him clockwise (as a mark
of reverence), those men stood rooted here and there, wailing frightfully.


While they were lamenting thus unceasingly, Rama passed beyond their sight, as the
sun sinks out of view at nightfall.


Then Rama, a tiger among men, in his chariot, crossed Kosala territory, which was
rich in grain and treasure, inhabited by men given to charity, benevolent and free from every
danger, pleasing, full of temples and sacrificial stakes, adorned with gardens and mango-orchards,
intersected by ponds full of water, populated by contented and well nourished people, abounded in
herds of cows which deserved to be seen by all kings and which re-echoed to the chanting of
religious texts.


Rama, the best among the resolute, moved into the middle of a happy and prosperous
kingdom, abounding in lovely gardens and fit to be enjoyed by kings.


There, Rama beheld the celestial and lovely river of Ganga with its tree
tributaries, carrying clear waters without green moss and frequented by sages.


The River Ganga was adorned with splendid hermitages within easy distance from one
another, with pools overflowing with water, visited at suitable hours by celestial nymphs thrilling
with rapture.


The blessed river was graced by gods and demons, Gandharvas(celestial musicians) and
kinnaras and was constantly visited by consorts of Nagas and Gandharvas.


The well known river was hemmed in by hills serving as the play- ground of hundreds
of celestials and embellished with hundreds of celestial gardens; it coursed through the heavens
for the benefit of gods and which in heaven was named "The stream of Golden Lotuses".


The holy river, the sound of whose clashing waves and its striking with rocks
resembled a deep laughter, having a bright smile as white as a foam, its waters reduced at some
places to the shape of a maiden's plaited locks, was rendered beautiful at some places by whirl
pools.


At some places, its waters were still and deep. At some places, they were disturbed
with violent agitation. At some places, they made a deep roaring sound. At some places, they were
having a terrific noise


Hosts of gods took a dip into its water .It was adorned by white lotuses. It was
hemmed in, with expanse of small islands and at some places, lined with white sands.


The river was rendered resonant by swans and cranes, was graced with cackling of
Chakrawaka** birds and other birds which are in rut all through the year kept hovering on its
water.


At some places the river was adorned with trees growing on its banks encircling like
garlands, at some places crowded with thick cluster of lotuses.


At some places, it was graced with beds of water lilies in the form of buds and at
some places, it was reddened with the pollen of numerous flowers, as though excited with
passion.


Having every aggregation of dirt removed, the river presented a spotlessly clear
appearance like a crystal. The interior of the forest was reddened noisy again and again by the
elephants guarding the quarters, by the ruttiest wild elephants and the elephants of excellent
breed used for riding by gods.


Surrounded by fruits and flowers and tender leaves, shrubs and birds, it looked like
a young woman artistically decked with the best of jewels. The river was infested with dolphins,
crocodiles and snakes.


Rama, the mighty armed, reached the river Ganga, which is devoid of sins and which
dispels all sins, which had fallen from the mass of matted hair of Lord Shankara through the
spiritual power of Emperor Bhagiratha, which is rendered noisy by cranes and herons, which is a
consort of the ocean and which is in the vicinity of Sringaverapura(the modern Singraur).


Beholding the river Ganga with its waves covering whirlpools, Rama the great warrior
said to Sumantra the charioteer as follows: "We shall halt here itself today."


"Oh, charioteer! Not far from the river stands this very large sacred fig tree with
its many flowers and shoots. We shall stay here itself."


"I shall see (from here) the excellent river Ganga, which is auspicious and whose
waters deserve to be respected by gods, men, Gandharvas, beasts, reptiles and birds ."


Saying so be it' and nothing more to Rama, Lakshmana and Sumantra too then directed
the horses to that sacred fig tree.


Rama, the delight of Ikshvaku dynasty, reached that beautiful tree and got down from
the chariot along with Sita and Lakshmana.


Sumantra too dismounted from the chariot, unyoked the superb horses after which with
joined palms, he seated himself near Rama at the foot of the tree.


There, a king named Guha was Rama's friend dear to him as his own life. He was
Nishada by birth, a strong man and well known as a ruler of Nishadas.


Hearing of Rama the tiger among men having come to his territory, he approached the
prince, escorted by elderly ministers and relatives.


Seeing from a distance the king of Nishada coming, Rama along with Lakshmana
thereupon went forth to meet Guha.


Closely embracing Rama, Guha who felt disturbed, spoke to him, "This city too is as
much as Ayodhya to you. What can I do for you? Oh mighty armed! Who indeed will get such a lovely
guest?"


Having brought pristine cooked rice of excellent quality and other dishes of various
kinds, he then quickly offered him water to wash his hands and spoke as follows:


"Welcome to you, Oh, mighty armed! All this land is yours. We are your servants. You
are the Lord. Rule over our kingdom in an efficient way."


"Here have arrived various kinds of dishes, drinks and syrups as also excellent beds
(for you to sleep on) and food for your horses"


To Guha who was speaking as aforesaid, Rama replied thus: "We stand honored by you,
by your very visit to us on foot, as well as your show of affection and are pleased with you"


Pressing gently with his muscular arms, Rama spoke these words: " Oh, Guha! Thank
heaven that I am seeing you in good health with your relatives. Is all well with the kingdom, the
allies and the treasure?"


"I know your affection by which all this is extensively well arranged by you. But I
am not in a position indeed to accept it."


"Know me as under a vow to be an ascetic, wearing the robes of bark and deerskin and
by piety, I am determined to live in the forest by eating roots and fruits only."


"I desire nothing but a little forage for the horses. By being provided with this
much at the present moment, I shall be duly satisfied by you."


"These horses were cherished by the king Dasaratha, my father. I shall feel honored
by these horses being duly fed."


Then Guha on that spot commanded his men as follows: "Let water for drinking and
forage be supplied promptly to horses"


Having worshipped the evening twilight appearing in the west, with an upper garment
made of bark(on his person); Rama then took for food only water brought by Lakshmana himself.


Having washed the feet of Rama who was lying on the ground along with his consort,
Lakshmana then came and stood near a tree.


Guha too along with the charioteer conversed with Lakshmana and thereafter wielding
a bow; alertly kept a vigil over Rama.


The illustrious, lofty minded and the high-soled son of Dasaratha, who had never
seen suffering and who deserved all comforts, remained lying on the ground thereafter, while that
long night passed away.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereupon, Lakshmana obeying his brother's order which is kindly and auspicious,
went immediately to the house of suyajna.


Offering salutation to that brahmana living in a house of fire, Lakshmana spoke as
follows: "Oh, friend! Come and see the house of Rama who is doing an arduous task."


Then, Suyajna, having performed worship at the juncture of day and night, came at
once along with Lakshmana and entered Rama's house which was good-looking and inhabited by Lakshmi
the goddess of wealth.


Seeing him arrived, Rama with joined palms along with Seetha, moved clockwise as
around sacrificial fire, that Suyajna the venerable man who had the knowledge of Vedas.


Rama adored Suyajna with excellent Angadas(armlets) and beautiful earrings of gold,
gems stung on gold threads as also with keyuras( another ornament similar in shape to an Angada but
worn above it near the armpit) and bracelets as well as with many other excellent precious stones.
urged by Seetha, the said Rama then spoke to suyajna as follows:


"Oh the gentle sage, my friend! Now, Seetha wants to give for your wife a pearl
necklace, a string of gold and a girdle. please take them."


"Oh, friend! Seetha who is departing to the forest, is giving you for your wife
armlets adorned with figures cut in them and beautiful keyuras."


"Seetha wants to offer you that couch also inlaid with various jewels and provided
with an excellent coverlet."


"Oh, the best of brahmanas! I am giving you this elephant called Satrunjaya, given
earlier to me by my maternal uncle as well as those thousand elephants."


As requested by Rama, suyajna accepted the gift and bestowed bening blessings to
Rama, Lakshmana and Seetha.


Then, Rama who speaks polite words as coolly as Brahma to Devendra, spoke to his
beloved brother Lakshmana as follows:


"Oh, Lakshmana! Call those two excellent brahmanas Agastya and Kausika and worship
them with valuable gifts as water is poured to a crop of corn."


"Oh, Lakshmana the honour-giver, with great arms! Satiate them with thousands of
cows, gold, silver and with gems of great value."


"Oh, Lakshmana! Which brahman is studying Taittiriya(a school of yajurveda), a
preceptor, a man of conformity; a knower of Vedas, serving Kausalya with his devotion and blessing,
to him see that he is duly gifted conveyance, servant maids and silken clothing till he gets
satisfied."


"The charioteer called Chitraratha the companion of our venerable father was of very
long standing. Gratify him with valuable gifts of great worth, with clothes, with money, with all
types of small animals and with thousands of cows."


Here are many religious students carrying staffs, belonging to katha and kalaapa
branches of Yajurveda, who being always engaged in studying the sacred scriptures, do not perform
any other austerities but are highly honoured by even noble men, are inactive( in the sense, they
do not move out for alms) and crave for sweets. Cause them to be given eighty carts loaded with
jewels, a thousand bullocks carrying loads of rice and two hundred bullocks used for cultivation.
Give a thousand cows for use in their nourishment, Oh Lakshmana!"


"Oh, Lakshmana! Many celebates wearing fillets stand near Kausalya, cause them to be
given a thousand cows each."


"Honour all those brahmanas in every way, so that my mother Kausalya will feel happy
to see my gifts."


Then, Lakshmana the tiger among men himself gave that wealth, like Kubera, to the
best of brahmanas as instructed.


Rama, after giving abundant wealth to each one of the dependents, standing there
with tears in their throats, spoke to them as follows;


"Till my return, the house belonging to Lakshmana and also this house which is
occupied by me, should be guarded by each one of you, by turn."


Having thus ordered those servants distressed as they were, he instructed his
treasurer as follows: "Let my wealth be brought(here)."


Thereafter, the servants brought all the wealth of Rama. That very large heap of
wealth there appeared good-looking.


Rama, the tiger among men, along with Lakshmana then caused that wealth to be
distributed among the brahmanas, the children, the old-aged and the pitiable.


"There lived a brahmana by name Trijata who was born in garga community and was
reddish born in colour. He used to make his living in the forest by digging the soil, always
carrying an axe, a spade and a plough."


His young wife, having been afflicted with poverty, taking her small children with
her, spoke to that aged brahmana as follows:


"Throw away the axe and the spade. Carry out my word. Seek for the presence of Rama
who knows his duty and see if you get at least something."


He heard the request of his wife, wrapped a strip of cloth that could hardly cover
his body and set out towards the track wherein lies Rama's palace.


Up to the fifth gate, none in that society of men could obstruct this Trijata, who
was equal in spiritual splendour with the sages Bhrigu and Angira.


That Trijata having approached the prince Rama, spoke the following words: "Oh, the
most illustrious prince! I am a destitute, having many children in my family. I always dwell in the
forest, with an occupation of digging the soil. Look to me, as you know."


Thereupon, Rama replied jestingly to him as follows: " By me, even one thousand cows
were not given away so far. You will get as many cows to such an extent as you will throw this
staff."


Winding his loin cloth round his waist hurrily and twirling his staff, he swiftly
threw it with all his strength, excited as he was.


Flying away from his hand and crossing across the Sarayu river, that staff fell
close to a bull amidst a flock of cows numbering in several thousands.


Embracing him, Rama of virtuous mind caused to be delivered to Trijata's hermitage
the cows up to that bank of Sarayu.


Thereupon, Rama pacifyingly spoke to that son of Gargi as follows: "You need not
express your contempt, for this was only a jest indulged in by me."


"I only desired to know your strength, which is unfathomable and hence this trial
for you. If you desire any other thing, opt for it."


" I am telling the truth here. There is no limitation for you. Whatever riches
belonging to me, are indeed for brahmanas. If the wealth earned by me is given abundantly to you,
it will bring in joy and fame."


Thereupon, Trijata along with his wife accepted that flock of cows and were
delighted. Then, he pronounced on Rama the virtuous man, the blessings to enhance reputation,
strength, delight and happiness.


Rama being inspired by the befitting words of honour and having his heart satisfied,
immediately bestowed on friendly people, a great wealth earned by righteous might.


At that time in Ayodhya, there was no brahmana, relative, dependant, pauper or
mendicant who was not satiated with befittingly deserving honour, gifts and respect.


Thus completes 32nd chapter of Ayodhya Kanda in glorious Ramayana, the work of a
sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


Then, Rama Seetha and Lakshmana, who felt miserable, bowed down by touching the feet
of the king and went round him clockwise with joined palms.


After taking leave of Dasaratha, Rama who knew what is right and stood confounded by
sorrow, bowed along with Seetha to Kausalya.


Immediately following his brother, Lakshmana too bowed to Kausalya, then clasped the
feet of his mother Sumitra.


Smelling (as a token of affection) the head of Lakshmana mighty armed, who was
saluting her, his mother Sumitra who wished well of him, spoke weepin, to that son of her ( as
follows)


"Highly fond of your kinsman Rama, you have been pemitted (by me) to dwell in the
forest(with your eldest half-brother). Do not neglect your half-brother). Do not neglect your
half-brother Rama, who is going to the forest, my son!"


"Oh, sinless one! Whether in adversity or in riches, he alone is refugee to you. It
should become the code of conduct in the world, that younger brother should be subject to the
control of his elder brother."


"It is indeed a practice right from ancient times in your race, to make gifts, to
dedicate onself to performance of sacrificial rites and to foresake one's body to fight
battles."


Thus speaking to Lakshmana, who was in readiness to leave the forest and who loved
Rama dearly, Sumitra repeatedly said to him, "fare forth, fare forth!"


"Know Rama to be Dasaratha. Look upon Seetha the daughter of Janaka as myself.
Consider the forest as Ayodhya and depart happily, my son!"


Then, Sumantra the humble man, who was aware of humility, joined his palms and spoke
these words to Rama even as Matali(charioteer of Indra) would to Indra (the ruler of gods).


"Mount the chariot, oh the highly illustrious prince! May all be well with you! I
shall take you speedily, wherever you direct me to go."


"you have to reside in the forest for fourteen years. Those years, as directed by
the queen, are to be considered having commenced."


Having adorned herself, Seetha with her comely buttocks, mounted with a delighted
mind, that chariot which was shining like the sun.


Thereafter, Rama and Lakshmana the brothers quickly mounted that chariot, which was
replendent like fire and decked with gold.


For Seetha who was accompanying with her husband, Dasaratha gave away garments and
jewellery, taking into consideration the period for which she had to stay in the forest.


Even so for the two brothers, keeping the sets of weapon, an armour of hard make
with leather-cover in the midst of the chariot, Sumantra saw the three of whom Seetha constituted
the third mounted and quickly drove the horses which were highly admired, with their swiftness
resembling the velocity of wind.


Rama after departing to the great forest for a long term, unconsciousness prevailed
in the city. There was faintness in the strength of people.


The city( of Ayodhya) is filled with flurry, with its elephants intoxicated in rut
and highly excited and resonant with tinkling of ornaments of horses.


That city, including the youngsters and the old, stricken with extreme agony, ran
towards Rama alone, in the same way as the one afflicted with heat of the sun rushes towards
water.


Having down towards sides and back of the chariot with their faces turned towards
Rama and with their faces filled with tears, all those people said with loud voices to Sumantra
thus:


"Hold in the reins of the horses and go slowly and slowly, Oh charioteer! We would
behold the face of Rama, which would be henceforth difficult to behold for us"


"The heart of Rama's mother(Kausalya) is surely and undoubtedly made of iron, since
it does not get broken when Rama resembling an offspring of gods is going to the forest"


"Seetha(the princess of Videha kingdom) has done what ought to be done, by going
along with him like a shadow, delighted in virtue as she was and does not leave her husband in the
same way as Mount Meru does not leave the efflugence of sun"


"Oh, Lakshmana! You are attending ever to your brother who speaks affectionately and
is equal to the god. Ah, you are the accomplisher of purpose!"


"It is an immense fulfilment for you, it is a tremendous good fortune for you, nay,
it is even a means to heaven that you are following this Rama"


Saying so, those people were not able to restrain their tears that come and followed
that Rama, their beloved delight of the Ikshvakus.


Then, the king with the distressed mind, saying that he would behold his beloved
saw, came out of his palace surrounded by women who were too dejected.


In front of him was heard a huge noise of crying women, echoing like trumpeting of
female elephants when a lordly elephant has been pinioned.


At that time, the father of Rama as is well known as a glorious king Dasaratha(a
scion of Kakutstha) looked shrunk, like the full moon oversadowed by an eclipse.


That glorious son of Dasaratha(Rama) of inconceivable courage, directed the
charioteer in the words "Let the chariot be driven fast."


Rama commanded that charioteer with the words "Move on!" The people said to him
"stop!" Urged on the passage, the charioteer could not do both.


The dust raised on the road due to moving out of mighty armed Rama, was suppressed
by the falling tears of the citizens.


With full of wailing tears, the citizens of after making loud cries became
unconscious with deep agony, at the time of departure of Rama.


Tears born of anguish flowed from the eyes of women like(drops of) water falling
from lotuses by the commotion of fish.


Seeing the city with singleness of mind, the glorious monarch Dasaratha fell down
with agony, like a tree slain at its root.


Thereafter, seeing the king becoming feeble and much distressed, the outery of the
people rose from the rear of Rama.


Some poeple crying "Oh, Rama!" and some other scrying "Oh, Rama's mother!", made the
entire women in the gynaecium to weap.


Looking back, Rama saw the king sorrowful and perplexed in mind, as well as his
mother following (him) on the road.


Rama, bound by the chord of righteousness, could not gaze openly at his parents, as
a foal caught in asnare would not properly look at its dam.


Seeing them coming by foot, though worthy of a chariot, habituated to comfort and
unworthy of suffering, Rama commanded the charioteer with words: "Drive fast!"


Rama the tiger among men, feeling pained, as an elephant being pricked by a good,
indeed was not able to bear that plight of his father and his mother.


Rama's mother (Kausalya) ran towards her son, as a cow fond of her calf and whose
calf is tied(in a stall), runs home for her calf.


Rama again and again saw that Kausalya, his mother who was crying thus, running
after that chariot as though dancing, shouting"Oh, Rama, Rama!" "Oh, Seetha!" and "Oh, Lakshmana!"
trickling tears descending from her eyes for the sake of Rama Lakshmana and Seetha.


Dasaratha exclaimed saying "Stop!" while Rama called out "Go on, proceed!" (In that
way) Sumantra's mind became confused, as in between two (opposing) whirl pools.


Rama said to him: "You can say to the king that you did not hear (his call), even
when scolded (later). seeing their grief for a long time is quite unbearbale."


The charioteer, doing as per Rama's words, took leave of those citizens and drive
the horses more speedily even while they are going.


The king's people returned after (mentally) going round Rama. Their minds did not
return. Their impulse of tears also did not get reduced.


The ministers spoke to king Dasaratha as follows:" We should not follow to a long
distance him whom we wish to see come back."


Hearing their words, which were befilting with all virtues, the king Dasaratha felt
miserable, stopped short, gazing along with his wife, at his son Rama, with his whole body
perspiring and wearing a dejected look.


Thus completes 40th chapter in the AyodhyaKanda of the glorious Ramayana of Valmiki,
the work of a sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined


That brilliant and glorious Bharata, who was a rejoice to Ikshvaku dynasty marching
in easterly direction from the city of Rajagriha, thereafter observing and crossing Sudama* river
as well as the wide Hladini river, whose stream flowed towards eastern direction.


The pure and illustrious Bharata, who kept up his promise, crossing shatradru river
at Eladhana village, reaching the region of Apara parpata, crossing a rocky hill called akurvati,
seeing the villages of Agneyam and salyakartana as well as Silavaha river, crossed huge mountains
and traveled towards the woods of Chitraratha.


Arriving at the confluence of Saraswati and Ganga rivers, Bharata entered the woods
of Bharmuda, the north of Viramatsaya region.


Reaching and crossing a refreshing river named Kulinga, which is swift and
surrounded by mountains as well as Yamuna river, the army was then made to rest there.


Making cool the limbs of the tired horses by bathing there and cheering up them,
nay, taking a bath himself, drinking some water and carrying it for future use, Bharata proceeded
further.


The blessed prince Bharata traversed that rarely frequented huge forest by his
excellent chariot as the wind glides through an atmosphere.


Bharata soon reached the great river, Bharathi, which is difficult to be crossed, at
the city of pragvata in the region of Amsudhana.


Crossing the River Ganga at the city of Pragvata, he reached the river
Kulikoshthika, traversed it along with his army and then arrived at the region of
Dharmavardhana.


Bharata reached Jambuprasta village, which is located at the southern part of Torana
region and from there he arrived at a beautiful village too, named Varutha.


Making a camp in thatbeautiful forest there, Bharata traveled towards the east and
reached a garden in the city of Ujjihana, in which there are a number of Kadamba trees.


Having reached Sala and Kadamba trees, Bharata yoked swifter horses to his chariot,
allowed his army to come after him and quickly went ahead.


Having halted min Sarvatirtha village and having crossed Uttamika river and various
other rivers by mountain -ponies and reaching Hast prasthaka village, Bharata crossed Kutika river
and traversed kapivati river at Lohitya village.


Bharata, after crossing Sthanumati river at Ekasala village and Gomati river at
Vinata village, took rest at a grove of Sala trees at Kalinga city as the horses were very much
tired and then proceeded quickly.


Driving through grove quickly in the night, Bharata at the dawn saw the city of
Ayodhya, which was earlier built by King Manu.


Seeing the city of Ayodhya in front, after spending seven nights on his way, Bharata
the tiger among men, spoke the following words to his charioteer:


"O, Charioteer! The famous city of Ayodhya comes into view vaguely to me from a
distance, as a heap of white clay. It has beautiful gardens. It is filled with performers of
sacrifices and with people endowed with good qualities as well as well versed in the Vedas and with
Brahmins inmost abundant reaches , It is being ruled by a royal sage."


Earlier , a big clattering voice of men and women used to be heard all round in
Ayodhya. Now, I am not hearing that voice."


"The parks which used to beam with men streaming forth on all sides, having given up
sporting in the morning after entering them in thee evening having spent the whole night in sport,
now appear to me otherwise"


"These parks deserted by the lovers now turn out to be dejected . O, charioteer! To
me, the city appears to have changed into a forest."


"Here, as before, important persons indeed are not seen going into the city or
coming out it in carriages or on horses or on elephants."


"Earlier parks used to be conspicuously excited with joy and gaiety and were most
congenial for love contacts of men."


"I am seeing the same parks., today with lack of enjoyments on all sides and with
trees having their leaves fallen along the road, looking like picture of dismay."


"Even now at dawn, charming sounds with sweet and much melodious tone of animals and
birds intoxicated with happiness are not being heard."


"Why does, as before, pure and auspicious breeze laden with aloes and sandal wood
intensified with the fume of burnt incense,not blow today.?"


"Why today have the sounds of kettledrums, clay tomtoms and Vinas played upon with
drum-sticks or palms or fingers stopped which formerly never ceased at any time."


"I perceive various kinds of evil sinful and silly omens and by this, my mind is
dejected."


"O, charioteer! It is not possible that all sounds be well with my kinsfolk, as
indeed, even without anycause for a grievance, my spirit is cast down"


Despondent, distressed in mind, frightened and extremely entered the city, which was
ruled by the descendents of Ikshvaku.


Bharata, with his tiered horses entered the city through Vaijayanta gate. Greeted
with slogans of victory by the standing gatekeepers, he went inside, along with others.


Bharata, with a distracted mind, responded to the salutations of those porters at
the gate and those porters at the gate and spoke to the charioteer who was beloved to Asvapati as
follows:


"O, the faultless charioteer! Why was I brought so quickly without any reason? My
mind is apprehending some evil. I lost my all energy."


"Whatever things were heard by us formerly in the same case of ruin of kings, I am
seeing here all those signs."


"I am seeing the family horses in which dirt is not swept away, with their doors
wide open, bereft of splendor on all sides without any offerings being made, and with no incense
burned . Families are starving and people look miserably without any charming appearance."


"The temples of gods are deserted and have lost their radiance, with their splendor
of floral decorations lost, nor are there any assembling to perform sacrifices as before."


"Worships of the deities were placed aside. Assemblies of prayers are also not
adorned with saleable flowers and garlands today."


"Even traders lost interest in trading tie-ups and their minds are tied up in
thoughts. They are not being seen here today, as before."


"Clusters of birds in temples and large trees in the city are looking desolate. The
population of men and women in the city look thoughtful anguished weak messy and despondent with
their eyes held in tears."


After seeing those bad omens in Ayodhya, the broken hearted Bharata spoke to the
charioteer as aforesaid and went to the royal palace.


Beholding the city of Ayodhya,that formerly possessed the splendor of the capital
city of Indra, now with its squares houges and high ways deserted, the doors and hinges covered
with rust , Bharata was overcome with grief.


Seeing many things disenchanted to mind which did not occur at any time before in
the city, the high soled Bharata with his head bent down and with his mind miserable gloomily
entered his father's house.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Bharatha, while going to his maternal uncle's house, has taken his brother Satrughna
(he who has no sins and who annihilates his enemies) along with him with love.


Treated with good hospitality and paternal love by his maternal uncle, Yudhajit, who
was a lord of cavalry, Bharatha stayed with his brother there.


Those heroes of valour Bharatha and Satrughna, though staying there enjoying all the
comforts, were remembering their age old father.


The mighty Dasaratha was also often remembering his sons Bharatha and Satrughna who
were out of his state and who were equivalent to Indra and Varuna.


Dasaratha was bestowing his equal love to all his four sons who were best among men,
as though they were his four hands emerging out of his own body.


Rama, like the Brahma among all the living beings, the most virtuous among those
brothers and the mightiest was a great source of joy for his father.


That Rama - was He not the eternal Vishnu who was born on earth as prayed by
celestials to kill the egoistic Ravana?


Like Adithi by Indra, best among the celestials, Kausalya shone by her son Rama, the
mighty.


Rama was beautiful in form, a hero of valor and without envy. By virtues, he was
like Dasaratha. In this way, he was an incomparable son on earth.


That Rama was always peaceful in mind and spoke softly. He did not react even to the hard
words spoken by others.


That Rama, because of his good bent of mind, feels glad even by whatever way a good
thing is done to him. He does not remember any number of bad things done to him.


Whenever he finds some time even while practising archery, Rama used to converse
with elderly people, elder by way of conduct or wisdom or age or with good- natured people.


Rama was a wise man. He used to speak sweetly. He was the first man to initiate a
talk. His speech was compassionate. He was valorous. But he was not arrogant of his mighty
valor.


He did not speak untruth. He was all knowing. He used to be receptive and worshipful
to the elders. People used to love him and he used to love the people.


He had compassion. He conquered anger. He used to be receptive and worshipful to the
wise. He had mercy towards the meek. He knew what was to be done. He had always self-control. He
was clean (in conduct).


That Rama, having an attitude suitable for his social rank, giving due respect to
righteousness of warrior-class, believed that by following the righteousness he would attain great
fame and through it the fruit of heaven.


Rama was not interested in actions, which were not beneficial. He was a scholar. He
had no taste in tales opposing righteousness. Like vachaspathi, his eloquent speech contained a
series of strategies for action.


Rama was a young man without any disease. He was a good speaker. He had a good body.
He knew both time and place. He could grasp the essence of men. He was the one gentleman born on
earth.


People loved the virtuous prince Rama and treated him as their spirit moving
outside.


After completing his education properly, Rama, after knowing the veda along with vedanga-s
as prescribed, became better than his father in the use of bow and arrows.


Rama, having born in a good clan, was gentle minded. He was not feeble. He spoke
truth. He was straightforward. He was properly trained by elderly brahmana-s those who knew
righteousness.


Rama knew the real form of desire, wealth and righteousness. He had a good memory
power. He had a spontaneous wisdom. He had skills in arranging customs useful to society prevalent
at that time.


Rama was humble. He did not let his feelings appear outwardly. He kept his thoughts
to himself. He helped others. His anger and pleasure were not wasteful. He knew when to give and
when not to give.


Rama had a firm devotion and steadfast mind. He was not stubborn nor did he speak
evil words. He was free from idleness and was ever alert. He recognized his own errors and those of
others.


Rama knew the theory and practice of sciences. He understood the differences among
men. He could judiciously discriminate whom to protect and whom to punish.


He identified good men and protected them. He knew the people worthy of reprimand.
He knew the ways and means of getting income as well as the system of spending, as perceived by
economic sciences.


Rama could obtain great skill in the groups of sciences along with their
subsidiaries. He was interested in enjoying comforts only after understanding the economy
and virtues. He never remained inactive.


Rama was acquainted with the fine arts useful for entertainment. He knew how to
distribute the wealth. He was efficient in riding and also taming of elephants and horses.


Rama was the best of persons knowing the science of archery in the world; and was
well appreciated by the champions of archery. He attained skills in marshalling the army. He faced
and killed the enemies in battle.


Even enraged celestials and demons could not defeat Rama in battle. He had no
jealousy. He conquered anger. He had no arrogance and envy. He had not even humiliated any living being.
He had not surrendered to time.


That Prince Rama, with these good virtues, was fair to the people. He was agreeable
to the three worlds. By patience and the related virtues, he was equal to earth, by wisdom to
Brihaspathi and by valor to Devendra.


Rama, by his virtues, was a source of happiness to all the people and a spring of
joy to his father. As the sun shines with his rays, Rama was shining, thus, with his virtues.


The earth wished Rama to be her Lord as he was adorned with self -control and norms
of behavior bearing undefeatable valor equal to that of universal lords like Indra.


Dasaratha, who annihilates enemies, started thinking as follows after observing his
son with his many incomparable virtues.


The long living and aged Dasaratha thought: "Will Rama become king while I am still
alive? Shall I enjoy that happiness?"


A great loving thought was ringing in his mind that when he would be able to see his
beloved son Rama crowned as a king.


"Is not Rama, as a raining cloud to the earth, better liked by people than me, as he
desires the development of the world and has compassion towards all living beings."


"Rama is equal to Yama and Devendra in valor, to Brihaspati in wisdom and to a
mountain in courage. He is more virtuous also than me."


"Shall I attain heaven, after seeing in this age, my son ruling the entire
earth?"


Rama had many other virtues beyond hitherto stated virtues not to be seen in other
kings. His virtues cannot be counted and they are the best in the world. Seeing that type of
virtuous Rama, Dasaratha along with his ministers, decided to make Rama the prince.


The wise Dasaratha observed that there was sign of a great alarm being forecast because
of bad omens found in earth heaven and the sky. He also told the ministers that his body
was getting aged.


He recognized that if Rama were crowned as king, he would not have worries as Rama
had beautiful face as a full moon; was a great wise man; and was liked by the people.


The righteous Dasaratha was hurried with concern in the coronation of Rama as it is
for his own benefit and for the benefit of people. Because it is as per his liking and also as the
appropriate time has come.


Dasaratha called for other kings and officers staying in various cities and villages
in his kingdom separately.


The hurried Dasaratha did not call for the king Kekaya, the maternal uncle of
Bharatha or the King Janaka as he thought they both could hear the good news even afterwards.


The king Dasaratha presented them suitably with houses and jewelry. Duly adorned
himself, he looked after them in the manner Lord Brahma looks after his children.


All the invited kings, duly liked by their people, entered the assembly after the
king Dasaratha , who annihilates the opponent's army, occupied his seat.


The kings thus entered, occupied their various seats allotted to them by the king,
by facing toward the king as per the prescribed rules.


Surrounded by the respected and humble kings sitting closely to him as well as the
important heads of cities and villages, king Dasaratha shone like lord Devendra surrounded by
celestials.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Anasuya having spoken thus, Seetha without any jealousy, full of reverence for her,
addressed her gently as follows:


"It is not a surprise that a venerable woman like a you, talk to me like this, for,
I know well that a husband is a respectable person for a woman."


"O, venerable woman! Even if my husband be without fortune, he should unhesitatingly
be obeyed by me."


"How much more, if he be renowned for his virtues, compassionate, master of my
heart, who is ever affectionate, a religious person, manifests the tenderness of a mother and a
father to me."


The exceedingly strong Rama bears himself to all other Queens, as he exercises his
behaviour towards his mother, Kausalya."


"The valiant and pious Rama who is devoted to Dasartha and free from all sense of
importance treats all those women as his mothers on whom Dasaratha has even once bestowed a single
glance."


"While departing for the lonely and fearful forest, my mother-in-law imparted a
great message to me, which I have inscribed in my heart."


"What my mother taught me when witnessed by the fire, earlier at the time of my
marriage with Rama, I shall always remember them."


"O, virtuous woman! By your words, all that is being renewed. No austerity, other
than obedience to one's husband is decreed for a woman."


Savitri* is now highly honoured in heaven, for having served her lord faithfully
heaven, You too, having followed this, will proceed to heaven, in showing obedience to your
husband."


"This goddess Rohini, the excellent among all women, is not seen without the moon
even for a single moment in the sky."


"Such excellent women, devoted to their husbands, and by their meritorious deeds,
are highly honoured in heaven."


Hearing the words of Seetha, Anasuya was very much pleased, kissed on Seetha's
forehead and spoke delightfully (as follows)


"O, Seetha with a bright smile! There is a great merit acquired by me in virtue of
my various pious observances. Through that power, I wish to confer a boon on you."


"O, Seetha! Your words are suitable for the occasion and are charming too. I am
satisfied. Tell me what good I may do for you."


Hearing those words of Anasuya, Seetha was surprised and with a gentle smile spoke
to her, who was richly endowed with the power of askesis, saying; "Everything stands fulfilled (by
your grace).


Thus spoken by Seetha, the pious-minded Anasuya became more delighted and said: "O,
Seetha! Alas! I will create a great joy for you, which will be to your advantage."


"O, Seetha, the daughter of Videha kingdom! Here are divine gifts: a garland, an
apparel, jewels, a scented cosmetic and rare body-cream. These are all given by me to adorn your
limbs. They will be ever worthy of your and will remain in tact (even after constant use)."


"O, Seetha! Your body, anointed with these heavenly cosmetics, will cause your
husband to look beautiful, as Lakshmi (the goddess of fortune and beauty) does the imperishable
Vishnu (the Lord of Preservation)."


Seetha accepted the apparel, the scented cosmetic, the jewels and the garlands as
unsurpassed gifts of love.


Having accepted those gifts of love, the illustrious Seetha with joined palms, sat
near that female ascetic.


To inquire about a lovely tale of once upon a time, Anasuya who was firm in
austerity, started asking the following words to Seetha who was sitting near her in that
manner.


"O, Seetha! It is so said that you were won by the illustrious Rama through a
process of your self-choosing (svayamvara)*. This report has reached my ear."


"O, Seetha! I wish to hear that narrative in detail. Hence, tell me that tale in
full as you experienced it."


Then, Seetha obediently answered, saying "Hear me" and began to truly narrate that
tale of Svayamvara to the virtuous woman, Anasuya."


"A king of Mithila kingdom, named Janaka who was valiant and a knower of
righteousness, was devoted to the duty of his warrior class and was ruling the earth in a fitting
manner."


"While he was furrowing a territory of land, holding a plough in his hand, it is so
said that I came forth, splitting up the land, as a daughter of that king."


"The king Janaka, who was absorbed in scattering handfuls of seeds was surprised to
see me, with all my limbs covered with dust."


"Placing me personally in his lap with affection, that childless king Janaka called
one as his daughter, and was very fond of me since then."


"It is said that voice resembling that of a human being in the air above me rang
out, saying": "O, King! Let it be so. This divine child without a match is a daughter to you,
rightly."


"Thereafter, my father the pious mind the lord of men and the king of Mithila
kingdom was rejoiced in my possession and acquired extensive property."


"That king performing auspicious acts gave me into the care of the chief Queen. She
nourished me fondly and with maternal affection."


"Seeing my age to be such, when union with a husband can be easily had, my father
fell a prey to anxiety like an indigent man, feeling miserable by the loss of all his
possessions."


"Eventhough the father of an unmarried girl be like Indra himself on earth, suffers
indignity in the world from the suitor's men, no matter whether they are equal or inferior to
him."


"Perceiving that ill-treatment threatening him at no distant date, the king Janaka
was plunged into an ocean of anxiety and did not reach its end any more than a man without a bark
would reach the end of a sea."


"Knowing me to be the one not emerged from a mother's womb, the king after a deep
reflection, was unable to find a suitable and worthy husband for me."


"After reflecting thus deeply, the thought came to him, 'I shall inaugurate a
Svayamvara, a process of self-choosing marriage, for my daughter."


"In ancient days, Janaka received with affection from Varuna the rain-god, an
excellent bow with two quivers that should never lack arrows."


"That bow was so heavy in weight that no man could lift it up nor any of the kings
were bale to bend it even in their dreams."


"My truthful father called all the princes first and informed them in a meeting
about the bow to be lifted."


"Whoever is able to lift up and string this bow, I will bestow my daughter in
marriage on him. There is no doubt about it."


"Seeing that excellent bow, resembling a mountain in weight, and being unable to
lift it up, the princes offered salutation to it and went away."


"After a very long time, this Rama born in Raghu dynasty with a great splendour
possessing a true valour, along with his brother Lakshmana together with a sage Visvamitra, came to
witness a sacrifice."


"The pious-souled Visvamitra, having been received well by my father said to my
father, (as follows):


"These two boys, the sons of Dasaratha wish to see that bow. Show that bow, coming
from gods, to Rama the prince."


"Hearing the words of Vivamitra, Janaka caused the bow to be brought there. The
mighty and the valiant Rama bent that bow merely within an instant and immediately stringed the bow
with the bow-cord and drew the bow to the full."


"While Rama was drawing the bow to the full, the bow was broken into two in the
middle due to the resultant jerk. The terrific sound then created was like that of a falling
thunderbolt."


"Then and there, my father true to his promise decided to bestow me on Rama,
offering him a jar of pure water."


"But Rama did not consent to accept my hand till the will of his father, the Lord
and the king of Ayodhya had been made known to him."


Thereupon, my father-in-law and the aged Dasaratha was invited to Mithila by my
father and with his approval, I was bestowed on Rama, the knower of the self."


"My younger sister Urmila, the virtuous lady of lovely looks was given as a consort
to Lakshmana by my father himself."


"I was given thus to Rama in that Svayamvara, a process of self-choosing marriage. I
became devoted, by my good works, to my husband who is excellent among men of strength."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having spent the beautiful night under the big tree, Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana
started from that place when the immaculate sun had risen.


Having penetrated into a deep forest, they the illustrious trios, while seeing many
stretches of land and at some places, attractive scenery never seen before, proceeded in the
direction of that region where river Yamuna was flowing forth towards river Ganga, associated with
the name of Emperor Bhagiratha.


Observing various trees while walking at ease, Rama spoke to Lakshmana (as follows)
when the day had just receded.


"Perceive, Oh Lakshmana, the smoke looking prominent as a sign of the glorious god
of fire near Prayaga (the confluence of the holy Ganga and Yamuna rivers). I think that sage
Bharadwaja is staying nearby."


"We have certainly reached the confluence of rivers Ganga and Yamuna. Yes, the noise
produced by clashing of waters is heard."


"Pieces of timber split up by men who are dependent upon forest-products, as also
these trees of various kinds are seen in the hermitage of Bharadwaja."


Having walked comfortably, Rama and Lakshmana wielding their bows, reached the abode
of the sage Bhardwaja, near the confluence of rivers Ganga and Yamuna, while the Sun was falling to
the west.


Having reached the hermitage and scaring the beasts and birds (by his very
appearance as a bowman) and having proceeded on the intervening path for a while, Rama approached
the vicinity of Bharadwaja.


Arriving at the hermitage, the two valiant princes, who wished to see the sage,
accompanied by Seetha, halted at first at some distance off.


Entering the hermitage and beholding the high-souled sage who was austere and
contemplative, his glance sharpened through severe meditation, surrounded by a group of disciples,
who had kindled sacrificial fire, the highly fortunate man as he was, Rama together with Lakshmana
and Seetha greeted him with joined palms.


Rama (the elder brother of Lakshmana) introduced himself to the sage as follows: "Oh
venerable sage! We both are Rama and Lakshmana the sons of Dasaratha."


"Here is my blessed and irreproachable wife Seetha, daughter of Janaka who has
accompanied me to the lonely forest suitable for religious austerities."


"While I was being sent to exile by my father, my young and beloved brother
Lakshmana (son of Sumitra) of firm vows has also followed me to the forest."


"Oh, Venerable sage! Commanded by our father, we are entering a lonely forest to
practise asceticism, living on roots and fruits."


Hearing the words of that virtuous prince (Rama), the pious minded sage Bharadwaja
then offered Madhuparka* as well as water to wash his hands with.


The sage, who had practiced austerities, gave them various kinds of delicacies
prepared from wild roots and fruits and also arranged accommodation for them.


Honouring with words of welcome, the sage Bharadwaja seated, being surrounded on all
sides with beasts, birds and hermits, spoke thus to Rama.


Bharadwaja then said these endowed with righteousness to Rama, who had since taken
his seat after accepting the aforesaid hospitality:


"In fact, I am seeing you, arriving here after a long time, Oh scion of Kakutstha!
And I have heard of your unjust banishment."


"This holy place at the confluence of the two rivers is secluded and delightful. You
stay here comfortably."


Addressed in these words by Bharadwaja, Rama, born in Raghu dynasty, for his part,
interested in the welfare of all, replied in the following pleasant words.


"The people of the city and the rural folks Oh venerable sir, are nearer to this
place. Finding me easy to see at this place, people keen to see Seetha and myself, I presume, will
make their appearance at this hermitage. For this reason, I do not wish to stay here."


"See some excellent Seetha suitable for a hermitage in some lonely place, Oh
venerable sir, where Seetha, the daughter of Janaka, who is worthy of every comfort, may find
delight in it."


Hearing these auspicious words of Rama, Bharadwaja the great sage then for his part
spoke these suggestive words.


"Sixty miles from here, dear son, lies a sacred mountain on which you may takeup
your dwelling, which region is inhabited by great sages, is charming to look at from all sides,
infested by the black species of monkeys with a long tail, haunted by apes and bears, known by the
name of Chitrakuta and which closely resembles Gandha maadana mountain."


"As long as a man observes the peaks of Chitrakuta mountain, he will perform
virtuous deeds and will never set his mind on a sin."


"On that mountain, many sages having spent hundred years in austerities as though in
sport , ascended to heaven, duly attaining their final emancipation."


"I consider that mountain to be a very lonely and comfortable place for you to live
in. Orelse stay with m here itself, during the period of your exile, Oh Rama!"


The pious sage Bharadwaja fulfilled all desires of Rama; who was his beloved guest
and who was accompanied by his consort, Seetha and his brother, Lakshmana.


While Rama, having approached that great sage at Prayaga(the confluence of Ganga and
Yamuna), was discoursing on various topics, the auspicious night arrived.


Greatly fatigued, Rama(Scion of Kakutstha) accompanied by Seetha as the third
(Lakshmana being the second) who was accustmed to all comforts, happily spent that night at the
lovely hermitage of Bharadwaja.


When the night was gleaming into a dawn, Rama the lion among men approached the sage
Bharadwaja, who was gleaming with resplendence and spoke as follows:


"We have lodged in your hermitage tonight, Oh venerable sir! (Pray) you give us
permission for fixing our residence now, Oh sage practicing truthfulness !"


That night having come to an end, Bharadwaja replied for his part, as follows:
"Proced to Chitrakuta, rich in honey, tubers and fruits."


"I consider the abode of Chitrakuta as the right place for you to stay, Oh Rama,
possessed of great strength! You set off for that well-known, sacred and lovely mountain,
Chitrakuta which is adoned with clusters of trees of every description, frequented by Kinnaras and
Nagas, is rendered charming by the cried of peacocks and infested with lordly elephants and
bountiful with tubers and fruits."


"Since herds of elephants and troops of deer wander all around in the woodlands
there, you will visibly notice them Oh Rama!"


"Roaming about with Seetha, your mind will be delighted to see rivers, cascades,
peaks of mountains, fissures in rocks, caves and rivulets."


"After reaching the auspicious and absolutely beautiful Chitrakuta mountain,
reveberant in all direction with the notes of small white cranes and cucukoo birds as well as with
many kinds of deer and elephants in rut, settle down there in a hermitage."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Addressing invited gathering in the court, Dasaratha spoke in friendly, pleasing and
clear terms.


In a loud voice resembling that of a kettle-drum, resounding the air like a
thundering cloud and in a sweet splendid and incomparable voice endowed with the characteristics of
a king's voice, King Dasaratha the lord of men spoke to the kings as follows:


"It is well known that my excellent kingdom was ruled by my ancestral kings as if it
were their son."


"I have a desire that this entire land which was protected by the descendents of
Ikshvaaku dynasty, be bestowed with goodness and the resultant happiness."


"Following the path established by my ancestors, I have always protected my people
with alertness and to the best of my ability."


"In conducting the kingdom for benefit of the entire people, my body became impaired
under shade of the white umbrella."


"This body has been living for many thousands of years. Hence I desire rest."


"This burden of worldly righteousness is very heavy. This can be sustained only by
royal power with qualities like courage and valor. A person who has no control of senses can not
carry this burden. I have become tired while carrying this burden of righteousness. "


"I desire to take rest, entrusting the rule to my son for the benefit of the people,
after obtaining consent from all those best Brahmans who are close to me."


"My eldest son Rama is equal to Devendra in valor. He is the conqueror of cities of
enemies. He is equal to me in all qualities."


"Joyfully, I shall appoint Rama, who shines like the moon together with Pushya star,
who is the best among the protectors of righteousness and who is an excellent man, to the realm of
prince."


"If Rama becomes the lord, the three worlds also will have the best master. He is a
glorious man. That Rama is the only fittest lord for the kingdom."


"By entrusting this kingdom to Rama, I shall be thus doing an immediate good and
shall be devoid of difficulties."


"I am telling this after lot of thinking. Give consent to me if you feel this to be
good and befitting. How else shall I do it?"


"This is my desire. Yet, let there be thinking on any other beneficial way. Thinking
by impartial neutral people will be distinctive and well developed through grinding of opposing
views."


Those delighted kings complimented king Dasaratha so speaking with a loud applause
as the peacocks cry in delight when they see the raining great cloud.


That building appeared trembling by the sweet and reverberating sound made by the
gathering of people there with their fond uproar.


After understanding the opinion of King Dasaratha, who knew the holy and worldly
matters, the Brahmans, important people, urban and rural citizens came to a consensus after
discussing together and told the aged king as follows.


"Oh king! You are an elderly person with thousands of years of age. Hence,
inaugurate Rama as the ruling prince."


"All of us want to see Rama, with long arms, the hero with great might born in the
clan of Raghu , his face protected by a white umbrella, moving on a great elephant."


King Dasaratha, after hearing their words, spoke as follows as though he did not
know their mind earlier and sought to know their true intention.


"Oh kings, I have a doubt as to why you want Raghava to be the king immediately
after hearing my words. Inform your real opinion in this matter."


"Why do you desire to see my son as the prince, when I am ruling this earth with
righteousness?"


Those kings together with urban and rural citizens after hearing those words spoke
to the great soul Dasaratha as follows: "Oh king! Your son Rama has many auspicious virtues".


"Oh king! We shall tell you now the various virtues of your wise son, listen to
them. His qualities are equal to those of celestials. They are liked by all. They give happiness to
all."


"Oh king! Rama is equal to Devendra in heavenly qualities. He has true valor. He is
greater than all the kings born in Ikshvaaku clan."


"Rama is the world renowned gentleman. He is keenly interested in truth and
righteousness. Only Rama can make both righteousness and wealth combine without separation."


"He is equal to moon in making the people happy; equal to the earth in the quality
of forgiveness; equal to Brihaspati in wisdom and verily to Devendra in valour."


"Rama knows all righteousness. He is true to his word and has good character. He has
no envy. He has patience. He consoles those who are in troubles. He speaks good words. He has
gratitude. He keeps senses under control."


"Rama is soft natured; has stable mind, always an auspicious man, and has no envy.
He speaks truthful and loving words to all living beings. He worships aged Brahmans endued with the
knowledge of various sciences. By that, his name, glory and splendor are growing in this
world."


"He is skilled in the use of various weapons known to celestials, demons and men. He
has duly concluded his vow of studying the various sciences and has systematically learnt all the
Vedas along with its branches. *"


"Rama is best in the world in the art of music. He has best relatives. He is gentle.
He is not weak in mind. He has great wisdom."


"Rama was trained in all matters from the best of Brahmans skilled in the art of
righteousness and in the science of political economy. If it is necessary to go to a battle to
protect a village or a city, Rama goes with Lakshmana and returns home only after obtaining
victory."


"After returning from battle, Rama goes to citizens on an elephant or a chariot and
inquires about their well being as though they were his own kinsmen, like a father does to his
sons. He asks about their wives and children, about the sacred fires, about their servants and
students, always completely as per the due order."


"Rama the best among men always asks us interrogatively thus: 'Are your disciples serving you by keenly
performing their actions?' "


"Rama feels very sad towards afflictions of men; and feels delighted in all
functions celebrated by people on the occasions of child birth and the like, just as their own
father does."


"Rama speaks only truth. He is a great hero. He serves elders. He kept the senses
under control. Rama, who talks smilingly, protects righteousness in all ways."


"Rama duly procures beneficent deeds. He is not interested in wrangling talks. He is
an orator like Brihaspati by his replies and rejoinders."


"Rama, who enchants the world, has beautiful eyebrows. He has red and broad eyes. He
is absolutely like the God Vishnu himself in strength, heroism and valour."


"He knew the ins and outs of public administration. His senses are not afflicted by
passion. He is capable of administering not only earth, but also the three worlds."


"Rama's anger or mercy is not arbitrary at any time. He kills those who are to be
slain as per rules. He is not angered at the innocent."


"He gladly bestows wealth to those with whom he is satisfied. As the sun shines by
his rays, Rama shines by his qualities that are peaceful, which are enchanting and delightful to
men."


"All people desire Rama, who is endowed with this wealth of qualities, who has true
valour, who is equal to presiding deities like Devendra, to be their lord."


"Oh king Dasaratha! Rama is born to you as a son, because of your good fortune, for
the welfare of this world. He has all the virtues befitting of a son, like Kasyapa, the son of
Marichi."


"All people in the state including those in the capital as well as those in the
nearby and in the far off places, pray for long life, health and strength of Rama of reputed
nature."


"Both young and aged women are praying with a stable mind each morning and evening
to all celestials, for the benefit of renowned Rama."


"Oh best of kings, Dasaratha ! We shall see Rama adorned with princely kingdom. Your
son Rama has the complexion of a black lotus flower and annihilates all his enemies. Let the wish
of the people be fulfilled by your grace."


"Oh fulfiller of people's desires, Dasaratha! For our benefit, you gladly and
immediately inaugurate your son Rama, who is equal to Vishnu, who is interested in the welfare of
the entire world and who is possessing the best of virtues."

undefined

undefined

undefined


That Sumantra, who knew the ancient sacred works, passed over the crowded entrance
of the palace and reached the secluded inner apartment. In that area of the inner apartment, some
youths , wearing darts and bows, were on security-duty with due vigilance and attention. They were
all greatly devoted to the king and were wearing polished ear-rings.


There he saw aged palace-supervisors wearing orange coloured clothes, adorning
themselves well, having canes in their hands, well composed and being posted at door-ways.


All of them, the well-wishers of Rama, saw that Sumantra arriving and raised from
their seats hurriedly at once.


That humble-minded Sumantra spoke to them thus, "Tell Rama immediately that Sumantra
is waiting with reverence at the entrance"


They, the well-wishers of their master, approached Rama who was with his wife and
immediately informed him.


Knowing that Sumantra, who was intimate to his father, came, Rama who desired to
show kindness, called him in there.


That Sumantra saw Rama sitting like Kubera on a golden couch with the best
cloth-covering. He adorned himself well and had the body anointed with sandal perfume, purely
smelling like blood of a boar. With Sita, standing on his side with chowrie in her hand, Rama was
shining like moon with chitra star.


Sumantra, who knew polite conduct, offered salutation to Rama, who was refined with
his own brilliance, shining like the sun and the fulfiller of desires.


Sumantra, who was treated with respect by Rama spoke thus with folded hands to that
prince with beautiful face and who was seated on a swinging sofa.


"Oh Rama, the good offspring of Kausalya! Your father and the Queen Kaikeyi want to
see you. Go there soon."


That best of men with great brilliance was pleased to hear those words, then
honoured him and spoke thus to Sita.


"Oh Sita! The king and the queen together are thinking of something about me,
relating to coronation. It is certain."


"Then black-eyed Kaikeyi who is dexterous and friendly disposed, has perceived the
king's opinion and is inciting him for my sake"


"Kaikeyi, my mother is following the king's intentions with great pleasure, desirous
of my benefit and prosperity"


"It is certainly our luck that king and queen have sent Sumantra, who fulfils my
desires and wishes, as messenger".


"A worthy messenger has come who is truly representing the assembly there. It is
certain that today itself the king will anoint me for the right of succession to kingdom".


"I shall go immediately and see the king. You stay happily with the circle of
friends and enjoy yourself."


Sita, treated with respect by her husband and having black eyes, followed her
husband up to the door, thinking of auspicious things in her mind.


"King Dasaratha will give you kingdom, being served by brahmanas, which will invest
you with eligibility to perform the great sacrifice at the coronation ceremony like Brahma to
Devendra."


"I shall be delighted to see you, initiated for the perfect religious act of
austerity, wearing excellent antelope-hide, being pure and bearing a deer-horn in hand".


"May Indra the god of rain in the east, Yama the god of death in the south, Varuna
the regent of the ocean in the west and Kubera the god of riches and treasure in the north, protect
you".


Rama, adorned as in an auspicious festivity, took permission from Sita and started
from house along with Sumantra.


That Rama who came out, like a lion residing in a mountain cave from out of the
mountain, saw Lakshmana standing at the door, bowing with palms of the hand joined and put to the
forehead as a mark of respect.


Then, that prince the best of men, met his friends in the middle chamber. He saw all
the people who came there to behold him, approached nearer to them, greeted them and mounted the
excellent chariot, which was resplendent like fire and covered with tiger's skin.


That chariot was sounding like thunder. It was not congested. It was decorated with
gold and jewels. Its splendour was like that of Meru mountain, stealing the eyes. Excellent horses
looking like infantine elephants were tied to the chariot, which was moving quickly. That Rama
shining with splendour like Indra, the lord of sky, mounted such a chariot and went forth
quickly.


That splendid chariot, sounding like rain-cloud in the sky, came out of the house
like moon coming out of a mighty cloud.


Lakshmana, Rama's younger brother mounted the chariot in the back-side and protected
Rama with umbrella and chamara fan.


Then, the crowds started dispersing from all sides generating tumultuous hallowing
sound.


Thereupon, hundreds and thousands of important people mounted on excellent horses
and soldiers mounted on elephants, then followed Rama.


Valiant persons, dressed in armour adorned with sandal and aloe perfumes, wearing
swords and bows, declaring the arrival of Rama, went in front of Rama to receive him.


At that time, sounds of musical instruments, sounds of praising hymns of panagyrists
and lion-like roars of valiant persons were heard on the way.


While Rama, the annihilator of enemies, was going, well-adorned women standing in
porticoes of palaces, sprinkled flowers on him from all sides.


Women of exquisitely beautiful form standing in palaces and on ground were offering
salutations to Rama with the best words with a desire to please Rama.


"Oh, Rama, who creates happiness to mother! Have successful journey! Your mother
Kausalya will be certainly delighted to see you obtaining the paternal kingdom."


Those women thought that Sita, who is dear to Rama's heart, is better woman than all
women.


"As Rohini star stays together with the moon, Sita having obtained Rama as husband
must have certainly performed a great penance in former times."


While going through the royal road, Rama heard those pleasant words spoken thus by
women standing in turrets.


Then, Rama heard the words of people gathered there and also the words variously
pertaining to himself, by citizens.


"By the king's propitiousness, this Rama today is going to obtain this earth and the
wealthy kingdom. All our desires are going to be fulfilled because Rama will become the ruler."


"If Rama rules this state for a long time, it will be a great benefit to the people.
If he becomes a king none can see dislike and sorrow at any time."


While bards and panegyrists were moving in front praising with great respect,
invoking blessings and eulogised by the most excellent instrumentalists, Rama, like Kubera the god
of wealth, went with resounding horses and elephants.


Rama saw the great royal road which was spotlessly clean, having diamonds and
various vendible commodities. It was full of male and female elephants, horses and chariots. There
was abundance of people gathered at road junctions.

undefined

undefined

undefined


While those lions among men amidst a host of friends were lamenting, that night
elapsed with a much difficulty.


When the beautiful dawn broke, Rama's brothers along with their companions, having
made their offerings and recited their prayers on the banks of River Madakini, approached Rama.


Sitting in silence, no one uttered a word. Bharata, on his part, amidst his
companions, addressed Rama as follows:


"My mother has been consoled (by you) by giving this kingdom to me. I am giving back
that kingdom to you. Enjoy it without hindrance!"


"As a dam breached by a great on-rush of water during a rainy season cannot be
repaired so easily, this great continent cannot be defended by any one other than you."


"As a donkey cannot emulate the tempo of a horse, or an ordinary bird the movement
of Garuda (a kind of falcon), neither can I follow in your footsteps, O, Lord of the world!"


"O, Rama! Know his life to be blessed forever, on whom others depend Life is,
however, difficult for him who depends on others for this life."


"As a tree planted by a man may grow and with its great branches and immense trunk,
become inaccessible to a dwarf, yet though it may come to flowering, does not bear fruit, it yeilds
no pleasure for him. O, mighty armed! You ought to understand the import of theis simile and being
the distinguished Lord of all, may you guide us, your sevants!"


"O, emperor, the conqueror of foes! May all behold you, shining resplendent on all
sides like the sun, seated on the throne!"


"O, Rama! May the elephants, intoxicated with ichor be heard trumpeting on the
highway, when you do return and the women of the inner apartments rejoice, all happily joined
together."


Hearing the words of Bharata, who was thus appealing to Rama, the various people of
the city in approbation, said "Excellent! Well said!"


On seeing the illustrious and sorrowful Bharata thus lamenting, the prudent and
self-conposed Rama began to console him as follows:


"Man is not able to do what he wills. He is not the Master A fixed form or name
drives him hither and thither."


"All that is piled up, is finally disbursed. What rises, ends in a fall. Unio ends
in separation. Life ends in death."


"How a ripe fruit does not fear for anything other than its falling, so also a man
once born, does not fear for anything other than his death."


"As a house that is solidly contructed ultimately falls into decay, human being too
is subject to age and death."


"The night that has passed, does not return and the buntiful River Yamuna just
marches on towards the all-sufficient abounding in water."


"The pasing days and nights in this world quickly decrease the life-span of all
living being as in the summer, the rays of the sun dry up the water (in a pool)."


"You grieve for yourself. Why do you grieve for another? Even while you stay at
home, or departed to another place, your life-span gets shortened."


"Death walks just with us (as we walk) and sits with us (as we sit). Having
travelled a very long distance (with us), death returns along with us (as we return)."


"When folds have appeared on limbs and hair have turned grey; on what expedient can
a man having got decayed with age, come back to the original splendour?"


"People are deligted when the sun has risen and also when the day ends. But they are
not able to perceive the waning in their life-span."


"Seeing the onset of season, people rejoice, as though it has come something newly.
But the succession of the seasons devours the life of being."


"As pieces of drift-wood floating on the ocean coe toghether for a span, so wives,
children, kinsmen wealth and property come together for a while and part with us. Their parting in
deed inevitable."


"Here, no being can escape its destiny ( in the form of birth and death). For that
reason, the power to avert his own death does not ingrain in a man mourning for a dead person."


"As a caravan is passing on a road, one stationed at the way-side says, I too will
come behind you. In the same manner, we should inevitably follow the path taken by fathers and fire
fathers. Why a man who obtained that path, for which there is no return, distress himself.


"While the age reshes on, without any return like a flowing river, one's self should
be emplyoed in a pursuit leading to blessedness. It is said that beings are meant to be happy?"


"The king Dasaratha, our pious minded father performed almost all auspicious
sacrifices and paid plentiful sacrificial fees (to the officitaing preists and Brahmins) and went
to heaven."


"Our father reached heaven because he maintained his servants properly, protected
his subjects and realised the taxes in the manner prescribed by scriptures from them."


"Our father, the king Dasaratha obtained heaven because of his auspicious acts and
perfoming sacrifices involving heavy sacrificial fees."


"Having perfomed many types of sacrifices, enjoying worldly pleasure abundantly and
having obtained a long and virtuous life, king Dasaratha reached heaven."


"O, dear brother! King Dasaratha, our father who was treated with respect by all
virtuous men and who secured excellent life-span and enjoyments, is not to be pitied."


"King Dasaratha, our father, having abandoned his worn-out human body, indeed has
attained the celstial state, by which he can stroll in the realm of Brahma (the highest
heaven).


"No wise, learned and exceptionally clever man, would weep in such a manner, such as
I and you, about the emperor.


"The wise, who are steadfast, should indeed relinquish these sorrows, lamentatious,
weepings and such other states of misery."


"Be composed, O Most eloquent of orators! Control your grief, return to the City of
Ayodhya in order to obey the command of our father, the subduer of his senses."


"I also will fulfil the command of our father, the venrable man in that very place,
whre I have been ordered to stay by that king Dasaratha of virtuous deeds."


"O Bharata the Vanquisher of Foes! It is not justifiable for me to violate the
command of our father. You also must honour it to the end, for it comes from our father, out own
blood."


"O, Bharata! Hence, I shall conform to the honourable word of our father, the
practiser of virtue, by my act of dwelling in the forest."


O, Tigher among men! Thus should a pious man act, who seeks to harm none, who is
obedient to his elders and who aspires to conquer the higher world."


"O, excellent among men! perceiving the virutous conduct of our father, the King
Dasaratha, act in conformity to your own nature."


Having uttered in about an hour, these meaningful words in this manner to his
younger brother on the need of abedience to his father's will, the magnamous and the mighty Rama
became silent.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Hearing those mournful words relating to the death of his father, spoken by Bharata,
Rama fainted away.


Hearing that unpleasant thunder bolt of words spoken by Bharata, like a thunderbolt
released by Indra the Lord of celestials in a battle, Rama the tormentator of his enemies,
stretched forth his hands and fell on the ground, in the same manner as a tree covered at
extremities with blossoms was cut off by an axe in the forest.


Seeing Rama lying on the earth, has the lord of the earth, like an elephant crushed
by a land slide on a bank where he was sleeping, those brother along with Seetha approached him
from all sides and weepingly sprinkled water on him.


Coming to his senses again and tears falling from his eyes, Rama began to speak much
plaintively.


Hearing that the King and his father had ascended to heaven, the virtuous. Rama
spoke the following words, consistent with righteousness to Bharata.


"What should I do with Ayodhya, now that my father reached the end of his life? Who
will rule that Ayodhya, which is bereft of that excellent king?


"In my misfortune, what can I do for that high-souled one? He died of grief on my
account and I did not perform the last rites for him!"


"O, Bharata the faultless one! Alas! Happy are you, by whom as well as by Shatrughna
the king was honoured by all obsequial rites!"


'Even after the end of my exile, I do not want to return to Ayodhya which is i a
disarranged state, deprived of a chief and made bereft of a king."


"O, Bharata the tormentator of foes While our father has gone to the other world,
who will counsel me when my exile in the forest is over?"


"Formerly, seeing my good conduct, our father used to address me in words of praise;
from whom now shall I hear those words delightful to the ears?"


Having spoken thus to Bharata, Rama went to seek out his consort, whose face
resembled the full moon, and overwhelmed with grief, spoke to her as follows:-


"O, Seetha! your father-in-law is dead. O, Lakshmana! You have become bereft of your
father. Bharata is informing a sorrowful news of the emperor being dead.


While Rama was uttering those words, copious tears caused to flow then from the eyes
of those sons of Dasaratha.


Then, all those brothers consoled Rama very much and said to him, "Let us offer
libations of water for our father, the Lord of the earth."


Hearing that her father-in-law, that great monarch had ascended to heaven, Seetha
was unable to see her husband through eyes filled with tears.


Rama consoled that Seetha who was weeping and himself stricken with grief, spoke to
the lamenting Lakshmana as follows:


"Bring the crushed pulp of Ingudi Tree and bring a piece of bark for being wrapped
about my loins and another for being used as my loins and another for being used as an upper
garment, so that we may proceed to offer libations of water for our magnanimous father."


"Let Seetha walk in the front and you follow after her nearby. I shall follow in the
rear. This indeed is the most terrible procession.


Then, their faithful companion Sumantra versed in the spiritual science, endowed
with great intelligence, kind, self-controlled and glorious, and deeply devoted to Rama, consoling
him and his brothers, took Rama by the hand and helped him descend to the auspicious River
Mandakini.


The illustrious Rama and others painfully reached the River Mandakini, that stream
of sacred fords, the enchanting one always covered with flowers, coming to a blessed ford, free
from mud and offered the lustrual water to the king, saying "Father! May this prove agreeable to
you."


Holding together in the form of a hollow his palms full of water and turning his
face turned towards the southern quarter and weeping the great prince pronounced the traditional
words saying:


O, Tiger among men! May this water without taint and incorruptible at the moment
that I offer it to you, reach you in the region of your ancestors where you are."


Thereafter, the glorious Rama, resending the bank of Mandakini River along with his
brothers, offered balls of food to his father.


Rama placed the pulp of the Ingudi tree mixed with the pulp of plums on a mat of
Kusa grass and overcome with sadness, weeping, spoke the following words:


"O, Great King! Be pleased to partake of this, which we eat for, that which man
eats, is also consumed by his gods."


Rama the tiger among men then re-ascending by the same path on the banks of the
river reached the charming summit of Chitrakuta mountain.


Gaining the door of his leafy hut, Rama the Lord of the earth then embraced Bharata
and Lakshmana with his arms.


From the sound of the cry of those brothers with Seetha, which resembled like the
roaring of lions rose an echo in the mountain.


Hearing the tumultuous clamour by those mighty heroes as, weeping they completed the
libations of water to their father, Bharata's army got alarmed.


Those troops of Bharata also said, "Assuredly, Bharata has joined Rama and this is a
great sound only of their wailing, as they mourn for their dead father."


Leaving their tents all of them having but one thought, went running in the
direction of that sound instantly.


Some went on their horses, some others on their elephants, some in their chariots
covered with ornaments while the youthful people went on foot.


In their longing to see Rama, whose absence though recent, seemed so long a period
for them, the whole people ran towards the hermitage.


Eager to see those brothers re-united there, they went hastily by various means of
transport, either by hoofed animals or by wheeled vehicles.


Trodden by many vehicles, beasts and chariots, that land emitted a tumultuous noise,
as a sky during the conjunction of clouds.


Frightened by that noise, the wild elephants, surrounded by female elephants,
perfuming the quarters with teh scent of their ichor, went to another wood from there.


Boars, wolves and lions, buffaloes, snakes, monkeys, tigers, Gokarnas and Gavayas
(two distinctive species of deer) along with spotted deer felt frightened.


The ruddy gooses, water-fowls, swans, Karandavas ( a sort of ducks), herons, male
cuckoos and cranes, utterly confused made it to various directions.


The sky filled with birds that had been frightened by that noise and the earth
covered with men, both looked beautiful at that moment.


Suddenly then, the people beheld the illustrious and the sinless Rama, sitting on
the bare earth.


Abusing Kaikeyi and Manthara, those people turned up with their faces bathed in
tears. while approaching Rama.


Seeing those people thus deeply afflicted their eyes suffused with tears, Rama
knowing what was right, embraced them like their father and mother.


Rama embraced some men there, while some others offered salutations to him.
Approaching them on that occasion, the king's son received them all including his friends and
companions.


The tumult of those magnanimous persons lamenting, resounded over the earth and in
the sky, reverberating through the mountain caves and in all quarters like the continuous beating
of drums.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Kausalya, the magnanimous mother putting away her grief, sipped water from the palm
of the hand, became purified and performed rites conducive to the welfare of Rama.


"Oh, Rama! Your departure cannot be restrained, depart now, return soon. Abide in
the footsteps of the virtuous."


"Oh, Rama! Let that righteousness, which you are fostering with courage and
discipline , protect you".


"Oh, son! To whom you will be bowing in salutation at cross-roads and in temples,
those along with great saints will protect you in the forest.


"All the arms given by the wise sage Viswamitra to you, will ever protect you who
are rich in good qualities"


"Oh, son with magnificent arms! Protected by your service to father and service to
mother as well as truthfulness, you will belong-lived"


"Oh, Rama, the best among men! May the wooden sticks used for feeding the sacred
fire, blades of the sacred Kusa grass and rings of Kusa grass(worn on the forth finger on
sacrificial occasions)sacrificial altars , temples and various sites selected by Brahmanas for
worship of gods, mountains, trees, bushes, large and deep pools of water, birds, snakes and lions
protect you."


"May the saadhyas and viswadevas (two different kinds of gods) and wind-gods along
with eminent sages ensure your happiness. May the cosmic person and the creator bring happiness to
you. May the Pusha, Bhaga and Aryama (three of the twelve sons of Aditi)and the guardians of the
spheres with Indra as their Head do good to you."


"May the six seasons, all the fortnights and months, years, nights, days and hours
always do good to you.


"May Veda, the Smriti texts taken as one body, the resolution and the piety protect
you, my son! May lord Skanda (the younger son of Lord Siva)and the moon god along with the sage
Brihaspati(the preceptor of gods), the well known seven sages as well as Sage Narada guard you on
all sides."


"May the four quarters along with the glorious guardians of the four quarters which
are enlogised by me may protect you always on all sides in that forest."


" Let all mountains , oceans, king(of oceans) Varuna, heaven and earth, the
intermediate space between them , rivers , astrological mansions including gods presiding over
them, day and night, the morning and evening twilights may protect you while you reside in the
forest ."


"The six holy seasons, months, years and the measures of time known as Kala
(equilent to one minute) and Kastha(1/30th of Kala or two seconds)bestow you happiness"


"Let the heavenly deities and the demons too ever grant happiness on you while you
traverse through the large forest, in the guise of a hermit and full of wisdom "


"Oh, son! Let there not be fear for you of demons the terrible ones performing cruel
deeds, of devilish beings called Pisachas and of all carnivorous animals."


"In that impenetrable forest occupied by you, let there be no monkeys, scorpions,
gad fies, mosquitoes, snakes or other insects ."


"Oh, son! Let the great elephants , lions with tusks, tigers, bears, terrible
he-buffaloes with horns not to be hostile to you.


"Oh, son! Let the other ferocious man-eaters belonging to animal-species, being
worshipped by me here, not hurt you."


"Oh, Rama, my son! May your path-ways be propitious ! Let your valour be powerful!
Go well with all accomplishments!.


"Let there be security to you against those dwelling in the atmosphere and on the
earth as well as against all the celestials as also your enemies."


"Oh, Rama! May Venus and the moon as also the sun and Kubera (the god of wealth) and
Yama (the god of death) who are being worshipped by me, protect you, while you reside in the forest
of Dandaka"


"Oh, Rama! May sacred hymns coming forth from fire, air , vapour, and from the mouth
of singer of sacred hymns protect you at the time of taking bath."


"Let Siva, the lord of all spheres, Brahma, the lord of creation, Vishnu, the
nourisher of beings, the sages and the rest of the celestials may protect you dwelling in the
forest.


Uttering thus, the illustrious Kausalya having large eyes, worshipped troops of
divinities with garlands , sandal paste and befitting hymns of praise.


Duly procuring fire, she caused oblation to be poured into it, as per the direction
of a high souled brahmana for the purpose of Rama's well- being .


Kausalya, the excellent woman procured clarified butter , white garlands, ceremonial
sticks and white mustard seeds.


That preceptor performed ceremony for peace as per the statute as well as without
error and carried out propitiatory oblation externally with the remaining sacrificial food left
after the main offering .


She then got brahmanas to pronounce blessings with honey, curd , unbroken grains of
rice and clarified butter by the repetition of certain hymns and to utter prayers for the well -
being of Rama in the forest.


The illustrious Kausalya gave the desired fee to that chief of brahmanas and spoke
as follows to Rama:-


"Which felicity occurred in Devendra the thousand- eyed, adored by all celestials
when a demon called Vritta was destroyed, let that felicity occur to you"


"Which blessing was invoked by Vinata to Garuda who was setting off to bring nectar
in the past , may that blessing happen to you."


"While blessing was bestowed on Devendra, the wielder of the thunderbolt , killing
the demons at the time of producing nectar, let that blessing come to you "


"Oh, Rama! Which good fortune occurred to Vishnu who was immensely glorious while
making his three strides (in order to measure the three worlds), let that good fortune come to
you


"Oh, Rama, the mighty armed! May the seasons , oceans , Dvipas (principal division
of earth girdled by oceans ), vedas, various spheres and quarters confer blessings with good luck
to you."


saying so, Kausalya, the large eyed proud woman placed some unbroken rice grains on
her son's head, smeared varieties of sandal pastes over his body, fastened about his wrist by way
of an amulet, a herb called Visalyakarani(so called because it helps in painlessly extracting an
arrow stuck into one's body )which is efficacious and auspicious and muttered sacred hymns in order
to enhance its virtue.


Though filled with grief inside, she appeared to be over-joyed outside and with
faltering words , spoke thus with only mouth and not with her heart.


The illusrious Kausalya embraced Rama, smelling his head by bending it and spoke
these words "Rama, my son! Go with ease with accomplishment of purpose, as you are."


Oh, son! With all your purposes fulfilled and with good health, I shall see you
returning to Ayodhya happily and taking over the reins of the kingdom


"All my thoughts of grief having been expulsed and my face shining with joy, I shall
behold you returning from the forest like the full moon rising from the horizon"


"Oh, Rama! I shall behold you returning here from your sojourn in the forest, having
fulfilled your father's word and installed on the splendid throne."


"Having come here from your sojourn in the forest, you will be familiar with
auspicious things and will ever be augmenting the desires of my daughter-in-law and of me. Depart
now, Oh, Rama !"


"Oh, Rama! Worshipped by me, let the hosts of gods headed by Siva, the Supreme
Being, the great sages, spirits, the chief of evil spirits, the celestial serpents and the
(four)quarters wish well of you, who is setting forth to forest, "


Having so said and having completed the rite of invoking blessings befittingly,
Kausalya whose eyes were overflowing with tears, further went clockwise around Rama and having
pressed close to him, embraced again and again.


Having been done circumbulation (as a mark of protection) thus by the pious woman
Kausalya, that highly illustrious Rama pressing his mother's feet again and again , shining by his
own splendour, went to Sita's house

undefined

undefined

undefined


Rama saw his father sitting on a beautiful seat, but with his face looking
completely parched up and miserable. Kaikeyi was at his side.


Rama being humble and well composed, first reverentially saluted his father's feet
and then saluted Kaikeyi's feet.


Dasaratha spoke only one word "Rama!" with his eyes filled with tears and dejected,
being not able to see or to talk any further words.


Having not seen earlier such a fearful form of his father, even Rama was frightened
as though he seized a snake by his foot.


That king Dasaratha was sighing heavily with senses sans pleasure, emaciated with
grief and anguish, with distressed and agitated mind, like ocean which cannot be perturbed,
becoming perturbed with row of waves, like sun which is eclipsed and who lost lustre like by a sage
who spoke untruth.


Contemplating over the unimaginable sorrow of the king, he was very much perturbed
as an ocean does on a full moon day.


The ingenious Rama, who is fond of his father's welfare, anxiously thought : " why
indeed the king is not greeting me in return just today?"


"At other times, the father, even though angry used to be gracious after seeing me
why today such a father has become weary after seeing me?"


Rama indeed distressed and afflicted with grief, with lustre faded from his face,
offered his salutation to Kaikeyi and spoke these words.


"I hope that I have not done anything wrong through ignorance. Tell me why father is
angry with me. You alone propitiate him in my favour."


"Why my father, who was always affectionate to me, has become displeased? With his
face becoming pale and dejected, he is not talking to me."


"I hope that either bodily affliction or mental distress is not troubling him. The
object of happiness is indeed difficult to be attained always!"


"I hope that no bad thing occurred to Bharata, the delightful man to look at or to
Shatrughna, the man of great strength or to my mother. "


"If our father becomes angry, I do not desire to live even for a moment without
satisfying him or without fulfilling his command."


"Man sees father as the visible god who is the root cause of one's own coming into
existence and how else can he behave towards him other than like that?"


"I hope you have not spoken anything which hurt my father's conscience with your
pride and anger."


"I am asking you why my father got this perturbation, which was not there earlier.
Tell me the true position."


Thus questioned by the great souled Rama, Kaikeyi fearlessly spoke these words for
her own benefit, without any shame on her part.


"Oh, Rama! The king is not angry. There is nothing of distress for him. But he has
something in mind which he is not telling from fear."


"To him, words are not coming off to tell disagreeable utterance to you, the dear
one. He promised me a word. It is to be certainly done by you."


"Long ago, the king honoured me and gave me a boon. Like a common man, he is
repenting now for having given the boon."


"This king promised me to give the boon and now he desires to build a dam wastefully
on a place where water has gone away."


"Oh, Rama! It is known by even wise men, that truth is the root of righteousness.
See that the offended king does not abandon such a truth for your sake."


"The king is about to mention that truth which may look auspicious or inauspicious
to you. Still, I shall tell you all that, if you shall do it afterwards."


"If what is spoken by the king does not create unfavourableness in you, I shall then
tell you. This king will not indeed tell you."


After hearing the words of Kaikeyi, Rama felt painful and spoke thus to her in the
presence of the king.


"Oh, queen! what a pity! Do not talk like that to me. If father tells me, I shall
jump even in fire. If father, who is a king, who wishes my welfare and who is venerable, commands
me, I shall eat fiery poison and shall sink into an ocean."


"Oh queen! Tell me the words of the king as desired by him. I even promise to do it.
Rama does not speak two things."


That vulgar Kaikeyi uttered very cruel words to that Rama, who was committed to
sincerity and speaking of truth.


"Oh, Rama! During a battle and a great war between celestials and demons long ago, I
protected your father who was pierced by darts. Then, he gave me two boons."


"Oh, Rama! According to those boons, I asked the king for coronation of Bharata and
for your going to Dandaka forest today itself."


"Oh, Rama! If you want to make yourself and your father faithful to a promise,
listen to these words of mine.


"Abide by your father's command. As per his assurance, you have to stay in the
forest for fourteen years."


"Bharata is to be enthroned with the use of complete collection of materials already
arranged by the king for your sake."


"You have to leave this coronation function and dwell in the forest of Dandaka for
fourteen years, wearing braided hair and covered with a hide."


"Let Bharata rule this earth, by residing in Ayodhya filled with various types of
precious thing together with horses, chariots and elephants."


"For this reason, king Dasaratha who is overwhelmed with sympathy towards you is not
able to see you with his face, afflicted with grief."


"Oh, Rama! Do as per the words of the king and liberate him by giving your father an
opportunity to maintain the truth."


Though she was speaking such harsh words, Rama was not affected with sorrow. But the
mighty Dasaratha became highly disturbed, having been afflicted by the calamity occurred to his
son.

undefined

undefined

undefined


After hearing those words, Kaikeyi with her face burning with anger, had a long and
hot sigh and spoke to Manthara as follows:


"Now itself, I shall send Rama quickly to forest. I shall get Bharata anointed for
princely kingdom immediately."


"O Manthara! What is the means by which Bharata will get the kingdom but Rama will
not get it by any method. Think about it now."


After hearing her words, the sinful thinking Manthara, spoke thus to Kaikeyi to
destroy Rama's benefit of kingdom.


"O Kaikeyi! I am very glad. I shall tell you the means by which your son Bharata
only will get the kingdom. Listen to it!"


"Oh, Kaikeyi! You desire to hear from me the means for your benefit. Have you
forgotten about it or are you hiding, even if you have remembered it?"


"O the lady of charms, Kaikeyi! If you desire to hear this from my mouth, I shall
tell you. Listen to me. Let it be acted upon after listening to me."


After hearing Manthara's words, Kaikeyi slightly rose from the well-laid bed and
spoke the following :


"O Manthara! Tell me the trick by which Bharata will get the kingdom and Rama will
not get it under any circumstances."


After hearing Kaikeyi's words, the sinful thinking, hunch backed Manthara, spoke
thus, with an intention to destroy Rama's benefit of kingdom.


"O Queen! Once upon a time, when there was a battle between celestials and demons,
your husband Dasaratha went along with you and other holy kings to help Indra in battle, to a
famous city called Vaijayata in which the demon Timidhvaja lived in a southern direction in the
forest of Dandaka."


"That great demon famously called shambara, who had several magic effects, defeated
all the celestials and conferred battle upon Devendra."


"In that great battle, demons approached and forcefully killed men who were injured
by arrows and also those who were sleeping at night."


"Then, king Dasaratha fought a great battle there. With their weapons, demons made
into pieces the long armed Dasaratha."


"O Queen! You saved the life of your unconscious husband by taking him away from the
battle field. There also, you again saved him, when beaten by demons with their weapons."


"O Kaikeyi with auspicious appearance! Getting delighted, he gave two boons to you.
Then, you said, " I shall ask you whenever I require them". He then agreed to it."


"O Queen! I do not know what had happened there. You yourself told this story
previously to me. I am keeping this in my mind because of my friendship with you. Hence, you have
to stop, by force, the arrangements being made for Rama's coronation."


"You ask your husband as two boons, anointing Bharata for princely kingdom and
sending Rama to exile for fourteen years."


If you send Rama to forest for fourteen years, your son Bharata will get intimate
association in the hearts of the people and will get stabilised in kingdom.


Oh, kaikeyi! Now, enter the room of wrath as if angry with him and lie down on floor
without any spread underneath and wearing soiled clothes.


As soon as you see Dasaratha, be sorrowful and keep on weeping, without looking at
him and without talking to him face to face.


You are always dear to your husband. I have no doubt about it. King Dasaratha will
even jump into a fire for your sake.


The king is not capable of making you angry. He is not even able to see you with
anger. He will give up his life for your love.


Oh, foolish one! The king will not be able to transgress your word. You realise your
abundant strength.


King Dasaratha may offer you diamonds, pearls, gold and various other precious
stones. Do not care for them.


Oh, Kaikeyi, the great fortunate! you remind Dasaratha of those boons given by him
to you in that battle between celestials and demons. See that your benefit does not get
thwarted.


Dasaratha himself will raise you from the floor and offer you the boon. Thus , after
making him steady, you ask for this boon.


"Oh, king! send Rama to forest for fourteen years. Let Bharata be made as king of
this earth".


Rama having been sent to forest for fourteen years, your son will stand firmly,
having laid his roots and will stay in power for the remaining period.


Oh, Kaikeyi! Ask Dasaratha of sending Rama to forest also as a boon. Thus, your son
will accomplish all the desired benefits.


Thus , by sending Rama to exile, he will not become amiable to people. Your Bharata
will become king, after the enemies having been annihilated.


When Rama returns from forest, your wise son will accumulate friends and draw people
to his fold, thus establishing roots himself.


This is the appropriate time for you. Be fearless and by your insistence, make the
king turn aside his effort to anoint Rama.


Kaikeyi, being brain-washed an unworthy matter as the most worthy matter by
Manthara, accepted her well and having delighted, spoke to her as follows:-


Though of right thinking in nature, Kaikeyi was very much surprised to hear
Manthara's words and like a small girl, got into a wrong path.


Oh, Manthara! You are telling very good things. Till now, I have not recognised you
as this good. You are the best among the hunch-backed on this earth in making intellectual
decisions.


Oh, Manthara! you always show interest in my well being and wish for my benefit. But
for you, I would not have been aware of the king's intentions.


There are so many hunch backed persons in the world. Their bodily construction is
very bad. They are crooked and dreadful. But you appear lovely, as a lotus flower bent by
breeze.


Your chest is appearing equally on both sides and is loftily extended unto the
shoulder. Below it is the stomach with an excellent navel, which is lean as though it is shy of
seeing the loftiness of chest.


Oh, Manthara! with perfect hips and well rounded breasts and with your face like an
untainted moon you are shining well.


Oh, Manthara! your waist decorated with golden belt is making sound. Your
leg-muscles are well rounded and your feet are tall.


Oh, Manthara! you are splendid like a royal swan walking before me, with long thighs
are wearing a silk sari.


In addition to all those thousand magic effects lying in shambara, the lord of
demons, another further thousands of magic effects are lying in you.


In your long hunch, which looks like an apex of a chariot, are dwelling your various
thoughts, royal arts and magic effects.


Oh Manthara! When Rama goes to forest and Bharata gets kingdom, I shall adore this
hunch back with a golden garland.


Oh, Manthara! After accomplishing the benefit desired by me, I shall, with delight,
get your hunch back anointed with well refined gold of good quality.


Oh, Manthara! I shall get beautiful ornaments made and for your forehead auspicious
dots of variety done of pure gold.


You will be moving around like an angel, wearing beautiful clothes. You will achieve
an important position in the eyes of your adversaries with pride and with your face, incomparably
competing with moon.


The hunch backed women, adorned with all ornaments, will always do service, at your
feet, as how as hunch-backed women, adorned with all ornaments, will always do service at your
feet, as how as hunch-backed you are doing it to me.


Manthara in this way being praised spoke these words to Kaikeyi, who was lying in a
clean couch like a flame of fire upon the sacrificial altar.


Oh, Kaikeyi the auspicious one! When water has already flown out, there is no use
constructing a dam. Now rise and do this purposeful action. Show your influence to the king.


By surrendering to the words of Manthara and having been thus encouraged by her,
Kaikeyi who was of wide eyes, who was proud of her intoxicating beauty, who was a gifted woman and
a queen, removed pearl necklace worth in lacs and other great valuable auspicious ornaments from
her body, entered the chamber of wrath along with Manthara, lied on the floor there like a golden
wire and spoke to Manthara as follows:


"After Rama's going to the forest, Bharata shall get the kingdom. Or else, you
inform the king that I died here itself".


Neither gold nor diamonds nor ornaments are of any use to me. on which day Rama gets
anointed for the kingdom, the same day it will be the end of my life.


Afterwards, that Manthara again spoke to the seriously talking mother of Bharata
that is Kaikeyi the following words which were beneficial to her and not beneficial in relation to
Rama.


If Rama becomes king, you and your son will be destroyed. Oh, Kaikeyi of auspicious
qualities! Hence you try for coronation of your son, Bharata


Having thus hit by arrows of words employed by Manthara again and again, Kaikeyi
felt sad, was angry with the king, by keeping hands on her heart, was surprised with the cleverness
of Manthara and praised her time and again.


If Rama does not go to forest from here, I do not long for any mattresses or
garlands or sandal paste or eye-liner or drink or food or even the loaf here.


If Rama does not go to forest from here, I do not long for any mattresses or
garlands or sandal paste or eye-liner or drink or food or even the life here.


Kaikeyi, thus uttering cruel words, having removed all ornaments, lied on the floor
without a mattress like a fallen angel.


Kaikeyi, having removed all adornments, having her face covered by the darkness of
extreme anger and with her depressed mind, looked like a starless sky in a gloomy night.

undefined

undefined

undefined


The king, awakened after some time, with his mind afflicted with grief, got into an
anxious thinking.


Due to banishing of Rama and Lakshmana, a great calamity befell on Dasaratha who was
equal in strength to Indra like sun seized by obscurity, which is attributed to the demon Rahu.


After Rama along with his wife departed to the forest, Dasaratha the king of Kosala
recalling his earlier sin, wanted to tell Kausalya, whose eye-corners were dark in colour all about
it.


After Rama was sent into exile to the forest, King Dasaratha, on the sixth night at
mid-night, was recalling his sin done (long ago).


King Dasaratha, afflicted by grief for his son, recalling his sin, spoke the
following words to Kausalya who was suffering from sorrow for her son.


"O, blessed lady! O gracious one! A doer reaps surely the fruit of his own deeds
corresponding to the nature of work either good or bad, of that which he does!"


"He who does not consider, while undertaking actions, the relative value of their
fruits as well as the utilities or defects accruing from them, is surely called a fool."


"Anyone, who after seeing their (charming and big) flowers, greedily desires their
(large and luscious) fruits and nourishes Palasa trees, by cutting off a mongo grove, he will come
to grief after bearing of their fruit."


"He who without knowing the result goes running towards action, will come to grief
as a nourisher of Kimsuka trees coming to grief at the time of their fruit-bearing."


"I nourished Palasa trees, by cutting off mango grove. Being wicked-minded in
abandoning Rama at the time of arrival of fruit, I am lamenting thereafter."


"This sin was done by me while I was young and wielding a bow. At that time, I was
famous as a young man, who can shoot heard (but unseen) object by an arrow, O Kausalya!"


"This grief, obtained by my own accord, has befallen me, as by a boy in ignorance
eating poison in the world; O, Kausalya!"


"How the other man became disillusioned by Palasa trees, I also became disillusioned
in the same manner, without knowing accurately the correct result of hitting a target by means of
sound only."


"O, Kausalya! You were unmarried till then and I was the Prince Regent. Then came
the rainy season which enhanced excitement and desire (for hunting)."


"The sun, partaking fluids from earth and warming the world with its rays, entered
the terrible southern quarter haunted by spirits."


"Heat disappeared suddenly. Resplendent clouds appeared in the sky. All frogs,
cuckoos and peacocks were full of joy."


"Birds with moistened top of their wings as if they bathed, reached with great
difficulty the trees, the tops of which were shaken off by rain and wind."


"Enveloped by water falling again and again on the water already fallen, the
mountain with its antelopes in rut, glowed like an ocean."


"Although the water-streams were crystal clear, they flowed in serpentine courses,
with white and red colours because of their admixture with ashes and mountain-minerals on the
way."


"The water-streams, which were crystal-clear till then, became churned with reddish
waters, carrying water by a wrong way, after the onset of rain."


"With a wish to do hunting as an exercise in that most comfortable season, I went
along Sarayu River, in a chariot, wearing bow and arrows."


"Without my senses under control and with an intent to kill there a (wild) buffalo
or an elephant or any other wild animal coming in the night at that place for the purpose of
drinking water, I was ready with my bow at a solitary place."


"Hearing the sound, I killed turning towards it, a wild animal, which came to the
bank of Sarayu River and another violent beast too which came there."


"Meanwhile, in that darkness and not within the react of the eye, I heard the sound
of a pitcher being filled up, the sound of which appeared like that of an elephant."


"With an intent to hit that elephant, I drew out a shining arrow resembling a
serpent, targeted towards the direction sound and discharged it."


"I released a sharp arrow, resembling a serpent. There, at dawn, arose a distinct
voice uttering 'Ah! Ah!' of a forest-inhabitant, dropping down in water after his vital part was
hit by an arrow."


"While that arrow was attacking a human voice there was heard, saying, 'Oh, how a
weapon did rush upon an ascetic like me?' "


'I came to the river, which is away from habitation, in the night to fetch water. By
whom I was hit by an arrow? On the other hand what wrong have I done to anyone?"


"To a seer like me, of having laid down violence and living a fruits and roots of
wild plants in the forest, how a killing by an arrow is enjoined?"


"Who is desirous of killing me, wearing a mass of locks of hair and clad with bark
of trees and deer-skin? What harm was done to him by me?"


"A vain act concerning only with a useless objective is undertaken in this manner.
No one will admire him, as for instance like any man seeking the bed of his preceptor's wife, as
good."


"I do not worry that much of my death. I worry both for my mother and father, in the
case of my death."


'By what means of livelihood this elderly couple, maintained since a long time by
me, support themselves when I obtain my death?'


"I and my aged parents are killed by a single arrow. By a man without self control
and being very much a fool, all of as are virtually killed."


"Hearing those pitiable words and since I was always intent on righteousness, I felt
distressed. The bow and arrow fell down from my hands to the ground."


"Hearing his pathetic cry, weeping profusely during the night, I became unconscious
frequently, utterly bewildered as I was, due to flare-up of my grief."


"Distressed in mind and with much sorrowful feeling, I reached that place and saw
the ascetic, hit by the arrow at the bank of Sarayu River, with his tresses of hair scattered, his
pitcher of water thrown asunder, having his limbs anointed with sand and blood lying down as he
was, hurt by the arrow."


Looking up with his eyes, as if going to scorch with his glory, at me who stood
terrified and sick in mind, he spoke those harsh words then:


"O, king! I, who was carrying water for my parents, was hit by you. What was the
harm done to you by me who is residing in a forest?"


'Being hit on my secret part by a single arrow, you virtually killed both my mother
and father, who are blind and aged.'


"Both of them, weak blind and thirsty, might have refrained their thirst with
difficulty and waited with expectation of my arrival since long. I am sure."


'Surely, our (mine or father's) religious austerity or sacred knowledge have not
borne fruit because my father does not have information about me, having fallen down and lying on
the ground.'


"What my disabled father, unable to walk around can do, even if he knows like a tree
unable to protect another tree which is being cut off?"


'O, Dasaratha! Going there soon, you alone tell my father; so that he will not
scorch you by his anger, as a forest is scorched by a flared-up fire.'


'O, king! This foot-path will lead you to my father's hermitage. After going there,
seek his graciousness, lest he should get angry and execrate you."


'O, king! Extract this arrow-head from my body. This sharp arrow torments my
delicate vital part in the same way as a river-current corrodes the sandy bank, which is at a
height.'


"While extracting the arrow-head from him, this thought entered my mind. With
arrow-head in his body he will suffer, even though surviving. But after extracting the arrow-head,
he will die."


"Then, the son of the sage perceived worry in the heart of myself, who was lamenting
pitiably, suffering from anguish."


Sinking into despondency with distress, distorting his limbs in agony, coiling round
himself on the floor with extreme pain and having approached the end of his life, he spoke to me
(as follows) with great difficulty.


'Suppressing my grief with firmness, I am becoming stable-minded. Let the torment in
your heart, caused by the thought of your having killed Brahmana be removed.'


'O, king the ruler of the country! I am not a Brahmana. Let there be no agony in
your mind. I am born through a Sudra woman by a Vysya.


"While he was speaking in that manner with great difficulty, his vital part having
been hit by an arrow and was rolling on the ground, now exerting himself, now trembling and
sinking, I drew out that arrow from him. That sage looked up towards me in fear and relinquished
his life."


"O, my dear Kausalya! Seeing him, with his body drenched in water, weeping with
anguish, unceasingly sighing his breath, with injury in his vital part and lying down in River
Sarayu as he was, I became very much grief-stricken."

undefined

undefined

undefined


Rama on the other hand, pacifying Lakshmana (son of Sumitra), who was very much
agitated and infatuated with anger, spoke the following words:


"While Bharata, wieldin a bow and highly wise-man himself is coming here, what is
the use of a bow or sword with a shield?"


"O, Lakshmana! Having promised to make our father's wish a reality. What shall I do
with the kingdom by acquiring an ill-fame in killing Bharata who came here to see me?"


"I should not enjoy the spoils obtained by slaying a relative or friend, like the
partaking of a poisoned food."


"O, Lakshmana! It is for your sake I desire virtue, legitimately acquired wealth and
pleasure or even the earth itself. I promise this to you."


"O, Lakshmana! I desire the throne only for the protection and happiness of my
brothers. I touch my weapon and swear this fact."


"This earth, bounded by the sea is not hard to obtain for me, O the excellent man! I
do not indeed wish even the position of Indra by unrighteousness."


"If there be happiness that I could enjoy without Bharata or you or without
Shatrughna, may it be without Shatrughna, may it be burnt to ashes by fire, O the
honour-giver!"


"I think Bharata was back to Ayodhya, with full of affection for his brothers. He is
dearer to me than my life- he who is mindful of the duties of his race. Hearing of my exile and
that I was wearing matted locks and the antelope skin, accompanied by Seetha and you, O most
valiant of warriors, in his devotion towards me and due to the distress that troubles his mind,
Bharata has come to see me. He has not come with any other motive."


"Getting angry with Kaikeyi his mother and speaking unkind and harsh words to her,
the glorious Bharata after getting permission from our further, came here to bestow kingdom to
me."


"This is the proper time for Bharata to come here and see us. He does not behave or
even think unkindly towards us."


"Has Bharata at any time done any harm to you previously? What so the reason for you
to be so apprehensive of Bharata now?"


"Indeed, Bharata must not hear harsh or disagreeable word from your lips. If an
affront is offered to him, it is offered to me!"


"O, Lakshmana! How should a son strike his father, even in a distress or a brother
strike a brother who is as dear to him as his life?"


"If you are uttering these words for the sake of the kingdom, I shall tell Bharata
to give the kingdom to you, when I see him."


"O, Lakshmana! When Bharata receives this command from me, "Cede the empire to him",
he will answer, So, be it."


At these words spoken by his honourable brother, to whom he was devoted, abashed,
shrank into himself.


Listening to these words ashamed, answered: "I think that our father Dasaratha came
here to see you himself."


Observing the emberassed , Rama said, "I think the mighty armed Dasaratha came here
to see us."


"Or rather, to my mind, as he knows that we have been accustomed to comfort,
reflecting that we are dwelling in the forest, he wishes to take us home."


"The glorious Dasaratha, my father possibly will take back Seetha from the forest,
she who has ever lived in the heart of prosperity."


"O, warrior! See those two excellent horses of noble breed, shining attractively and
vying with the wind in swiftness."


"Here is that colossal elephant who is moving at the head of the army called
Shatrunjaya, the aged companion of our sagacious father."


"O, the mighty armed! But I do not see that white heavenly canopy of our father,
well known insignia in the world. An apprehension on this point is created in my mind."


"O, Lakshmana! You get down from the top of the tree. Act on my word." Thus spoke
the virtuous Rama to that Lakshmana.


Descending from the top of that Sala tree, Lakshmana the victorious in battle, with
joined palms, stood by the side of Rama.


Commanded by Bharata that no trampling of army should be made in the hermitage of
Rama, the army was encamped round the mountain.


That royal army of Ikshvaku race, crowded with elephants horses and chariots was
encamped around the edge of the mountain occupying an area of one Yojana and a half.


Brought by the virtuous Bharata, who laid aside his arrogance, placing the
righteousness in forefront in order to propitiate Rama, that army showed itself to be disciplined
in the vicinity of Chitrakuta.

undefined

undefined

undefined


While the night passed away, there arrived at the residence of the emperor, at the
dawn of the next day, highly cultured and excellently learned bards who were pronouncers of
benedictions and whose custom was to eulogize the king, as well as singers and panegyrists uttering
recitations in different styles.


Their sounds of praises, uttering benedictions in a loud voice and pronouncing
accolades of the king, pervaded in full the interior area of the palace.


While those bards are uttering praises, others who make a bang of claps, patted the
claps, eulogizing the previous glorious acts of Dasaratha.


The birds dwelling in royal palaces perched on the branches of trees and others in
cages were awakened by that sound and began to twitter.


The auspicious words uttered by bards parrots etc and the notes of Vina as well as
blissful songs of the metric verses filled that palace.


Then, as before, persons who maintain pure practices and those who were skilled in
the services to the king, most of whom were women and eunuchs, arrived there to serve the king.


Those who took care of royal ablutions brought water sprinkled with yellow sandal in
golden pitchers in accordance with appropriate time and the set procedures.


In that manner, women too most of whom were virgins brought all that were pleasing
to the touch, eatables, decorative clothing and ornaments.


All that was brought near him was endowed with all auspicious characteristics
offered with reverence as per prescribed scriptures. All that was extremely graceful.


All that retinue, greatly excited as they were, without coming near to the king and
with a suspicion as to what was it, stayed thus till sunrise.


The women who were empowered to go near the bed of Dasaratha went in proximity to
him and woke him up.


Even so, those modest and prudent women with proper conduct, touched Dasaratha's bed
and could not detect any sign of life whatsoever in him.


Those women knew the condition of a body in sleep, by its gestures, movements and
others. As such, they were possessed of tremor apprehensive as they were about the king's life and
they resembled like tips of reeds standing against a stream.


Now, seeing the king, certainty arose in the minds of those doubting women about the
calamity (of death) that was apprehended.


Overpowered by grief for their sons, the slumbering Kausalya and Sumitra did not
wake up, as though they were completely overtaken by death.


Kausalya bereft of luster, pale faced, emaciated with grief and dispirited, did not
shine brightly (as before) like a star hidden away in darkness.


The queen Kausalya, immediately close to the king and with Sumitra on her side, was
not shining as before with her face ruffled by tears of grief.


The persons in the gynaecium, having seen those distinguished queens in slumber and
also the king in that manner, thought that the king had lost his life while just sleeping.


Then, those beautiful women miserably cried loudly with their voice, like female
elephants crying when their group leader an elephant was removed from their place in the
forest.


Kausalya and Sumitra suddenly obtained consciousness by the sound of their cries and
woke up from sleep.


Kausalya and Sumitra, on seeing and touching king Dasaratha, cried O, Lord!' and
fell on the ground.


Rolling on the floor and covered by dust, Kausalya the daughter of Kosala king was
not shining as before and resembled a star falling down from the sky.


While the king was deceased, all the women saw Kausalya who fell on the floor
appearing as a female elephant, which was killed and felled on the ground.


Kaikeyi and all other wives of king Dasaratha were weeping afflicted by grief and
fell unconscious.


That great noise was supplemented by those wailing women, bloated by which, it
rendered the house all the more noisy.


That gynaecium of the king who met his appointed end was filled with people who felt
bewildered with fear and restlessness, with tumultuous wail all around, and crowded with relatives
disturbed by sorrow, with happiness withered away in it suddenly and became a sight of misery and
despondency.


Knowing that the glorious king of excellence had passed away, the king's wives
surrounded him with great sorrow; pitiably wailing profusely and lamented, grasping their hands one
another, like orphans.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, Bharata along with his routine, who were treated hospitably, spent that
night there and sought out Bharadwaja with fondness.


The sage Bharadwaja, who had offered oblations in sacred fire, spoke to Bharata the
tiger among men, who had come there with joined palms, saying.


"O, handsome Bharata! Have you passed this night at out place comfortably? Is your
retinue fully satisfied with my hospitality? Tell me."


After joining his palms in salutation, Bharata replied to the very glorious sage
Bharawaja, who came out from his hermitage (as follows):


"O, venerable sage! With all the enjoyments in plenty provided by you, I felt
comfortable and satisfied, along with very ministers my entire army and our animals too used in
riding.


"All of us including our servants have become very much satisfied with our fatigue
and pains removed, having eaten a good food and having been provided an excellent
accommodation."


"O, Blessed one! O, excellent sage I am taking leave of you. Look on me with favour
as I find myself in my brother's vicinity."


"O, knower of piety! Tell me about the abode of that high-souled and pious man,
Rama. Tell me as to which way I have to go, how much distance it is from here and so forth."


The highly glorious Bharadwaaja, of rigid asceticism, thus questioned by Bharata
(who intensely desired to see his brother again), answered him as follows:


"O, Bharata! About twenty eight miles from here, there is a mountain called
Chitrakuta, in the middle of a lonely forest with its charming Cascades and groves."


"Going towards its northern side, you will find River Mandakini, which is entirely
enveloped with flowering trees and having forests flourished with charming blossoms."


"O, beloved Bharata! Beyond that river, there is a mountain called Chitrakuta and on
it, their hut made of leafy twigs. Both of them are residing there. It is sure."


"O, the illustrious chief of army! Direct the forces filled with elephants horses
and chariots either towards the southern route or to the left proceeding southward. You can see
Rama then."


Hearing him speak of the journey, Dasaratha's wives eligible of sitting in
palanquins, descended from their palanquins and stood encircling Bharadwaja.


Kaikeyi with her unfulfilled desire and despised by the whole world, clasped the
sage's feet with bashfulness.


Kaikeyi with her unfulfilled desire and despised by the whole world, clasped the
sage's feet with bashfullness.


Then, having gone around that venerable and eminent sage clock-wise, she stood close
to Bharata himself, distressed as she was at heart.


Then, Bharadwaja, firm in austerity, enquired Bharata as follows: "O, Bharata! I
wish to know the distinctions of your mothers."


Hearing the words of the learned sage, Bharadwaja, Bharata who was skilled in
expression, with joined palms, spoke the following words.


"O, venerable sage! This miserable queen emaciated by grief and fasting, is the
royal consort of my father, who you see resembling a goddess - it is she, Kausalya who, as Aditi
gave birth to Upendra, begot that Tiger among the heroes, with the great gait and pride of a lion
that Rama."


She, who stands clinging to the left shoulder of Kausalya, plunged in grief is the
unfortunate Sumitra, looking like a branch of Karnikara tree with withered flowers standing in the
interior of the grove. Both Lakshmana and Shatrughna, the two heroic princes of god-like appearance
and unfailing prowess are the sons of this godly woman, Sumitra.


"She, through whose fault, those two tigers among men have to obtain a miserable
existence and King Dasaratha deprived of his son, has gone to heaven this woman, who is irate,
imprudent, arrogant, who esteems herself to be good-looking, who is covetous of power, unworthy
though noble to all appearance, know her to be Kaikeyi, my mother of wicked and sinful resolve, in
whom I see the root cause of my great misfortune."


Bharata, the tiger among men, with his red eyes spoke thus in a voice broken by sobs
and breathing as he like an enraged and hissing snake.


Hearing the aforesaid words spoken by Bharata, Bharadwaja the great intellectual
sage replied in the following meaningful words.


"O, Bharata! Kaikeyi is not intended to be understood by you accusatively. The exile
of Rama with indeed become ultimately a cause for happiness!"


"Now, due to Rama's exile, there will indeed be a benefit to the celestials the
demons and the sages whose souls are purified by meditating on the Universal Spirit."


Bharata satisfied, paid obeisance to him and circumambulated him in bidding a
farewell, directing the army to get prepared to leave.


Then, setting out for their destination, countless people ascended many excellent
chariots, decorated with gold, duly harnessed to horses.


Female and male elephants, wearing golden chains and flags, distinguished by the
sound of bells, like thundering clouds at the end of a summer marched in a form.


Various precious conveyances, both big and small, marched forward. Pedestrians
marched forward by foot.


Desirous of seeing Rama and delighted, Kausalya and other honourable women
thereafter advanced on their excellent conveyances.


The illustrious Bharata mounted a readily kept palanquin which was auspiciously
shining like rising moon and sun and proceeded along with his escort.


That vast army with its countless elephants horses and chariots proceeded, covering
the southern direction, like a great cloud that has risen in the sky and on the other bank of the
Ganges, by mountains and streams, crossing the woods inhabited by deer and birds.


That army of Bharata, with its squadrons of rejoicing elephants horses and warriors,
penetrating into the vast forest, frightening innumerable beasts and birds, appeared resplendent
there.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Having shown Mandakini River in that manner to Seetha, the daughter of Mithila, Rama
set on the hill-side in order to gratify her appetite with a piece of flesh.


Rama, whose mind was devoted to righteousness stayed there with Seetha, saying;
"This meat is fresh, this is savoury and roasted in the fire."


While Rama was thus sitting there the dust and clamour of Bharata's army, which was
approaching, ascended into the sky.


Meanwhile, frightened by that gigantic clamour, the leaders of elephants and other
animal - troops, in rut, were tormented and fled in different directions from there.


Rama heard that sound generated from the army and also saw all those leaders of the
animal-flock, running away from there.


Seeing those animals running away and hearing that clamour, Rama spoke to Lakshmana
(son of Sumitra) of burning courage as follows:


"Alas! O, Lakshmana! Sumitra is blessed with a noble son in you. Here is heard a
tumultuous sound as terrific as that of a roaring cloud. See what it is."


"The lordly elephants in the forest, the buffaloes in the great woods and the wild
beasts frightened by lions are suddenly running away in various directions."


"O, Lakshmana! You ought to find out whether it is a king or a prince roaming for a
hunt or some other savage beast."


"O, Lakshmana! This mountain is difficult of access even to birds. You ought to find
out soon, all this in an accurate manner."


Lakshmana quickly ascended a Sala tree in flowering and looking towards all
directions, saw towards eastern side.


Looking in northern direction, Lakshmana saw a huge army, full of chariots, steeds
and elephants accompanied by smart foot-soldiers.


Lakshmana informed Rama about that army which was full of horses, elephants and
chariots decorated with flags and spoke the following words also.


"O, honourable brother! Extinguish the fire. Let Seetha occupy a hiding place. Make
your bow ready with a bow-string and arrows. Wear an armour."


Rama the tiger among men replied to Lakshmana, saying: "O, Lakshmana! See, whose
army do you think is this?"


Hearing Rama's words, Lakshmana was irritated like a fire and spoke the following
words, as though he was wishing to scorch the army.


"Bharata, Kaikeyi's son, having obtained coronation and desirous of making the
kingdom free of enemies, is coming here to kill both of us. It is clear."


"The gigantic and glorious tree with superb branches is shining over there
prominently. The ensign bearing the device of a kovidara (pomegranate) tree is shining on that
chariot."


Among the cavalry, some are cavorting merrily on their swift horses, while others
are beaming with delight, mounted on their elephants.


"O, warrior! Let us take up our bows and ascend the mountain or let us stay here
itself, fully prepared with our weapons in our hands."


"O, Rama! Will that flag with the insignia of a Kovidara tree come into our
subjugation? Can we see Bharata, because of whom a great misfortune has occurred to you, to Seetha
and to me?"


"O, Rama the warrior! By the reason of whom you were deprived of an eternal kingdom,
such Bharata as a foe who is coming here, deserves to be slain by me."


"O, Rama! I see no sin in slaying Bharata. None is charged with unlawfulness, if one
strikes down an aggressor."


"Bharata is the assailant and his death is legitimate. He being dead, you will rule
the entire earth."


"Let Kaikeyi, who is craving for the kingdom see, with great sorrow, her son slain
by me today in battle, as a tree is crushed down by an elephant."


"I shall kill Kaikeyi too along with her friend the hunch-back and other
accomplices. Let the earth today be relieved of a great sinner."


"O, warrior bestowing an honour! Today in the concentrated fury that injustice has
kindled I shall scatter the enemy - battalions as a fire consumes the dry wood."


"Today, with my sharpened arrows, I shall slay the bodies of my foes and make this
forest of Chitrakuta overflow with blood."


"The elephants and horses whose breasts were laid open with my darts and the men too
struck down by me, be dragged about by savage beasts."


"By killing Bharata together with his army in this great forest, I shall discharge
my debt to my bow and arrows."

undefined

undefined

undefined


That wicked woman spoke these words to Dasaratha, tormented as he was by the anguish
for his son and who was unconscious, tossing about on the floor.


"What is this? After hearing the promise given to me, you are lying on the floor
dejected as though you had committed a great sin. You ought to keep yourself within bounds of
ethics".


"People who know what is right, indeed speak of truthfulness as highest virtue. I
too have taken refuge in truth and made you aware of your duty."


"Oh, king! Having made a promise to a hawk and offering his body to the bird , king
Saibya, the ruler of world obtained the greatest destiny".


"In that manner, Alarka the glorious man plucking his own eyes, indeed gave
remorselessly, to a brahmana skilled in the Veda, When asked for them."


"Following ruthfulness, ocean the lord of rivers even at the time of flow-tide, does
not transgress even to a small extent its boundary because of its compliance to truth."


"Truth is one word and is Brahma. On truth is righteousness established. Truth
indeed is the knowledge imperishable. By truth alone, the supreme being is obtained".


"O the best among men! firmly adhere to truth, if your mind is fixed on piety. Since
you are a bestower of boons, let my aforesaid prayer be granted.


"In the matter, yearning righteousness and to concede to my request, send Rama the
son to exile. I am telling to you three times".


"Oh, the venerable man! If you do not implement our agreement, it means you have
abandoned me. Hence I will give up my life here in front of you".


Thus compelled by Kaikeyi, who had no uneasiness in her mind, king Dasaratha could
not untie the cord of plighted word that fettered him , any more than Bali could unloose the noose
placed (round his body) by Indra(through his younger brother Vamana in order to deprive him of his
sovereignty of the three worlds).


Like a bullock throbbing between yoke and the wheel , Dasaratha got agitated in
heart and became pale in his face.


King Dasaratha, with bedimmed eyes, was unable, as it were, to see. But with
difficulty, he controlled himself by recourse to firmness and spoke to Kaikeyi as follows.


"Oh, wicked woman! I abandon your hand, which was clasped by me in presence of
nuptial fire, when it was consecrated by sacred recitations as also your son begotten by me along
with yourself".


"Oh, Queen! the night has gone by, with the return pf rising sun. Elderly people
will certainly quicken me for installation of Rama with the sacred materials procured for the
purpose".


"Oh, woman of vicious conduct! If you obstruct Rama's installation, you including
your son cannot offer me water. Rama will be made to do the offering of water to me, after
death.


"Having seen people with that joy before, I cannot see them with there happiness
ended, without any merriment and having their faces turned downward in grief".


While that great souled king was speaking to her as aforesaid, the holy night
endowed with, moon and stars began to become clear into a dawn.


Kaikeyi of vicious conduct and of skilful talk, filled with anger again spoke these
harsh words to the king.


" Oh, king ! You are uttering words, which cannot be swallowed easily like in a
painful throat disease. You ought to summon your son Rama here without any delay."


"You will be the one who discharges duty, by installing my son to this kingdom, by
making Rama to wander in woods and rid me of enemies."


Impelled again and again by Kaikeyi, like an excellent horse being severely thrashed
with a whip, that king spoke these words to Kaikeyi.


"I am bound by the ties of morality. I lost my judgement. I wish to see the pious
Rama, my beloved elder son."


Meanwhile, the night began to become clear, with the rising of sun. While the
auspicious, moment united with lunar mansion approaching, the sage Vashishta who is rich in virtues
surrounded by his disciples entered the capital city of Ayodhya briskly, having procured the
requisite materials for Rama's coronation.


Passing through that city, whose streets were swept and watered decorated with ,
excellent flags, overspread with colourful flowers , made brilliant with various types of garlands,
filled with people of joy, with shops and markets with abundance, filled with lot of festivities,
anxiously waiting for Rama, fumigated on all sides with perfumes of sandalwood , also resembling
Amaravathy city(capital of Indra); the sage Vashishta beheld the excellent, gynaecium filled with
many a number of brahmanas, crowded with citizens and countrymen, looking splendorous with
brahmanas, knowers of sacrificial assembly filled with excellent brahmanas.


Sage Vashishta, being well pleased of seeing that gynaecium, got past those people
there and , entered it.


Meanwhile, Vashishta saw Sumantra by name, who was charioteer-cum-minister of
Dasaratha and who had a pleasing appearance coming out of the royal gate.


That great splendoured Vashishta spoke thus to the learned Sumantra, "Tell the king
quickly, that I have come."


"These pitchers filled with holy waters of ganga , gold pitchers with sea water and
an excellent seat with Udambara wood came for the purpose of Rama's installation ceremony. All
types of seeds, fragrant substances and precious stones of various kinds, honey, curd, clarified
butter, parched grains of paddy, blades of Darbha grass, flowers, milk, eight beautiful virgins ,
an elephant in rut, a glorious chariot with four horses, a special kind of sword called Nistrimsa,
an excellent bow , a palanquin with bearers an umbrella resembling the moon , a pair of white
chowries, a golden jug, a white bull with large , humo on its back, an excellent lion with
beautiful mane with large canine teeth, a throne, a tiger skin, fire with ignition , all varieties
of musical instruments,courtesans, women decked with ornaments, teachers, brahmanas, cows, animals
and birds which are sacred, the best of citizens and men of country side, merchants along with
their followers, all these and many other retainers speaking kind words, along with kings stand
waiting for Rama's coronation.


Hasten the emperor, so that Rama will get the throne when the day gets started at
the auspicious moment of pushya constellation uniting with the moon"


Hearing these words Vashishta the great souled, Sumantra entered the gynaecium along
with Dasaratha, the tiger among kings.


The doormen , who were wishing to do kindness to king, could not obstruct Sumantra,
who came before hand who was senior and who was highly esteemed by the king.


Standing besides the king and ignorant of that situation, Sumantra started praising
the king with very pleasing words.


Sumantra, standing with joined palms in the gynaecium of the king, eulogised the
king according to the appropriate moment as follows.


"How the splendid ocean gladdens at the time of sunrise, so do you by nature filled
with delight, gladden us with your delighted mind."


"At the very hour of sunrise, Matali (Indra's charioteer)praised Indra and the
latter conquered all the demons. In the same manner, I am awakening you."


"As Vedas along with the knowledge of the limbs of the body guide Lord Brahma (the
creator) who is self born, so am I awakening you now."


"Even as the sun along with the moon awaken the beautiful earth which sustains the
beings so, am I awakening you."


"Having dressed suitably for the auspicious ceremony and shining brightly with you
personality, raise up. Oh, Majesty, like the sun from mount Meru."


"Oh, Dasaratha born in Kakutsa dynasty! May the Gods -Sun and the Moon Shiva and
Kubera, Varuna, Agni and Indra bestow you victory!"


"Oh, the best of the kings ! The holy night has gone by. Know what has been done and
do what has to be done. All the requirements for Rama's coronation is kept ready" .


"The venerable Vashishta himself stands waiting at the gate along with brahmanas,
being saluted saluted with joined palms by citizens, village folk and merchants."


"Oh king! Give orders quickly for Rama's coronation ceremony. A kingdom without a
king is like cattle without a herdsman, army without a commander, night without the moon and cows
without a bull."


King Dasaratha hearing his words which were soothing and meaningful, was surrounded
with grief once more.


That king who was pious and glorious, having lost joy about his son, looked up with
sorrowful red eyes and spoke those to Sumantra. "You are chopping off my vitals further more, with
your words!."


Sumantra, after seeing the depressed king and hearing mournful words, joined palms
with salutation and slipped away to a distance from that place.


Dasaratha could not say any thing himself because of depression. Then, Kaikeyi who
is experienced in fore-thoughts, spoke thus to Sumantra.


"Oh Sumantra! The king, being smitten by emotional joy in relation to Rama, who
tired of awakening the whole night and got subjected to sleep"


"Oh, Sumantra! Hence, quickly go and bring the glorious prince Rama. Blessedness to
you! Do not have any hesitation in this matter. "


"He was thinking of that auspicious occasion in heart and rejoiced. With pleasure,
he set out, by the orders of the king."


Instigated by her, Sumantra thought that the righteous Rama would come there
certainly for coronation.


Sumantra thus thinking and dwelling in a great joy, set out with a desire to see the
long armed Rama


Sumantra coming out of gynaceumwhich looked like a splendid pool in the sea, saw the
gate being congested with throngs of people.


Afterwards, proceeding further on, he saw near the gate some kings stationed there
and very rich citizens having arrived there.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Thereafter, the lotus-eyes Rama, who was dark-brown in complexion and great beyond
compare, spoke thus to the charioteer, "Tell about me to my father."


Quickly entering inside, when sent by Rama, the charioteer saw the king having
sighs, his senses disturbed by grief.


He saw the king resembling an eclipsed sun, like fire covered by ash, as a lake
without water.


The charioteer, a great intellectual, saw Dasaratha repenting with his mind greatly
agitated and approached him with joined palms.


The charioteer, first inspiring the king with blessings of triumph, spoke thus in a
slow and sweet voice, overcome with fear.


"Your son, the tiger among men, having given away all his wealth to brahmanas and
dependents, is waiting at the gate."


"May auspiciousness betide you! Let that Rama, who is unfailingly brave, see you.
After bidding farewell to all friends, he wants to see you now."


"Oh, king! Rama is setting out to a great forest. See him who is resembling a sun
with rays of light, displaying royal qualities."


That king Dasaratha, who speaks truth, whose mind is virtuous, who is like an ocean
by his depth of character and who is blemish less like a sky, replied to Sumantra as follows:


"Oh, Sumantra! being all my wives, who are here. Surrounded by all of them, I want
to see the virtuous Rama."


Sumantra, after entering the gynaecium, spoke these words to those women as follows:
"Oh, the venerable ladies! The king is calling you. Go there without delay.


All those women, asked thus by Sumantra as per the king's orders, went to his
palace, after knowing the instructions of their husband.


Encircling Kausalya, three hundred fifty women, steadfast in their vow(of devotion
to their husband), with their eyes reddened, went there slowly.


After arrival of his wives, king Dasaratha spoke to that charioteer as follows, "Oh,
Sumantra! Bring my son here."


Taking Rama, Lakshmana and Seetha, that charioteer then speedily went to the king's
presence.


King Dasaratha surrounded by women, seeing from a distance his son coming with
folded hands, distressed as he was, rose swiftly from his seat.


Seeing Rama, King Dasaratha ran speedily towards him. But without reaching him he
fell on the floor senseless, afflicted as he was with sorrow.


Then, Rama and Lakshmana an eminent car-warrior, quickly approached that king who
seemed unconscious with full of grief as he was, through agony.


Sounds of thousands of women crying "Alas! Alas! Oh Rama!" generated all at once
from the royal palace, mixed with the sound of tinkling ornaments.


Holding Dasaratha in their arms and crying, both Rama and Lakshmana along with
Seetha laid him on the couch.


Then, Rama with folded hands spoke thus to king Dasaratha who got consciousness
within a short time and who was inundated in a sea of sorrow.


"Oh, emperor! I take leave of you, who are the lord of all of us. See auspiciously
towards me, who am about to leave for Dandaka forest."


"Permit Lakshmana also and Seetha too who is accompanying me to the forest. Even if
prevented(by me0 on many true reasons, these two are not agreeing to stay behind"


"Giving up grief, Oh the bestower of honour, grant leave to all of us, Lakshmana
myself and Seetha as Brahma(the lord of creation) did to his sons(sanaka and his three brothers who
intended to go to forest for practising austerities)."


Gazing at Rama who is unruffled, awaiting permission of the king for stay in the
forest, the king Dasaratha spoke thus:


"Oh, Rama! I was stupefied by Kaikeyi through a boon. Now, by confining me, be you
the king of Ayodhya."


When told thus by the king, Rama the best man in supporting righteousness and who is
proficient in expression, replied( as follows) to his father, after making salutation with joined
palms.


"Oh, king! You be the ruler of the earth for thousand years. But, I for my part,
will stay in the forest. For my sake, do not generate untruth about you."


"Oh, ruler of men! Having strolled in the forest for fourteen years, I shall clasp
your feet once more after fulfilling my promise."


Prompted secretly by kaikeyi, the distressed king, tied up by fetters of truth, said
weeping to that beloved son.


"Oh, darling! Proceed for welfare, for advancement and for coming again. Let your
path of travel be auspicious, undistracted and fearless from any quarter."


"Oh, darling, the seion of Raghu! Truthful as you are by nature and your mind being
given to righteousness, your decision cannot be reversed."


"Oh, son! Do not leave in any case today, now at night time. Even by seeing you for
one day, I may live happily."


"Looking at your mother and myself, stay at least for this night today. Satiated by
all the desired objects, you may leave tomorrow at dawn."


"Oh Rama, my son! An incorrigible thing is being done by you since for my pleasure
you are going to the forest a solitary place, leaving beloved ones."


"Oh Rama my son! Your exile is not agreeable to me. I was cheated by Kaikeyi who had
concealed intentions and resembled fire with ashes."


Incited by Kaikeyi who has destroyed established customs, you wish to redeem my
deceit, derived by me from her.


"It is not a great surprise, my son, that you my eldest son should seek to make your
father as one who does not have false promises."


After hearing these words of their father who was depressed, Rama and Lakshmana were
upset. Then Rama spoke these words.


Even if these worldly pleasures are obtained today, who will offer those things to
me tomorrow? Therefore I desire only to get away in lieu of all these enjoyments.


"This earth being relinquished by me; which included various provinces, filled with
people, imbued with riches and food grains, may be given to Bharata."


"I cannot budge now from my decision made about my stay in the forest. Oh king the
bestower of boons! You were pleased to give a boon to Kaikeyi and let it be fulfilled completely.
Be you a truthful man."


"I , as promised, fulfilling your command, shall live in the forest along with
forest-dwellers for fourteen years."


"Oh, king! Do not have any hesitation in offering the kingdom to Bharata. Neither
kingdom nor happiness indeed is desired by my nature. It is dear to me only to do your command as
directed."


"Let your sorrow disappear! Do not be overwhelmed with tears. The ocean, the lord of
rivers which is difficult to assail, indeed does not get agitated."


"I do not crave for kingdom or happiness nor again for Seetha nor even all these
enjoyments nor for heaven nor even for life."


"Oh, Jewel among men! I wish you to be a truthful mean, not a fallacious man. I
swear to you in your presence by truth and by virtue."


"It is not possible for me, Oh father, to stay on even for a moment. Therefore,
contain this grief, Oh Lord, for there is no going back upon my word."


"Oh Dasaratha the seion of Raghu! I was indeed asked by Kaikeyi to go to the forest.
It was also replied by me that I would go. I shall redeem that pledge."


"Oh, king! Do not feel anxious. We shall sport in the forest, flocked with peaceful
deer and rendered noisy by birds of various types."


"Oh, father! It was indeed said that even for celestials, father is the god.
Therefore, I shall carry out the father's word, considering it as divine."


"Oh father, the best among men! You will see me, when I come back after elapsing
fourteen years. Let this grief be given up."


"Oh, tiger among men! Why have you got perturbed-you by whom all these people bathed
in tears, ought to be consoled?"


"Let this city, province and whole of this earth left by me, be given to Bharata. I
for one following your instructions, shall proceed to the forest to dwell in it for long."


"Oh, king! Let this earth with multitude of mountains, comprising of cities with
their gardens relinquished by me, be ruled over barely by Bharata, within the bounds of
righteousness. Let the word of honour given by you(to Kaikeyi) come true."


"Oh, the faultless king! My mind is not directed on haughty physical enjoyments or
sensuous pleasures which is approved by the wise. Let your agony disappear, for my sake."


Oh, the sinless king! Therefore, now associating you with untruth, I just do not
desire for kingdom, nor all the sensual enjoyments, nor happiness nor existence nor even Seetha.
Let your pledge(given to Kaikeyi) prove true."


"I shall be happy, entering the forest filled with wonderful trees, eating fruits
and tubers as well as seeing mountains rivers and lakes in the forest. Let there be satisfaction
for you.


Embracing his son, that king Dasaratha, who had thus fallen on evil days, was
tormented with grief and distress, got fainted, fully losing his consciousness and not moving even
a little.


Then, all the queens assembled there except Kaikeyi began to cry. Sumantra also fell
into a swoon, while weeping. Everything there became loud lamenting.


Thus completes 34th chapter of Ayodhya Kanda in glorious Ramayana, the work of a
sage and the oldest epic.


undefined

undefined

undefined

Lakshmana became dejected and spoke these words, properly befitting for that time, to 
that Rama's mother Kausalya who was thus weeping.

"Oh, the honoured lady ! I also do not like Rama to be influenced by the words of a woman 
and go to the forest, leaving the prosperous kingdom."

"The king with perverted mind, of old age, one who is outraged by sensual enjoyments 
and possessed of passion can talk any thing, prompted by Kaikeyi."

"I can not see any offence or cause for blame in Rama that can expel him from the state 
to the forest."

I have not seen in this world any person, whether an enemy or an expellee, speaking ill 
of Rama indirectly."

"Can anybody observing ethicalness, causelessly get rid of a son who is equal to god 
who is honest, who is self-restrained and who is affectionate even towards adversaries?"

"Which son, knowing royal usage, can agree to the words of this king who is behaving 
as though he got childhood again?"

"Even before others get to know about this matter, make this dominion your own, with 
my help."

"Oh, Rama! While I am standing by your side along with a bow, protecting you who are 
standing as God of Death, who is capable of doing too much ?"

"Oh, Rama, the best of men! If the city of Ayodhya turns against you, I shall make it 
desolate of men with sharp arrows"

"I shall kill all those who are siding Bharata ,and are favourable to him. Soft person 
indeed gets disgraced!"

"If our father with an evil mind behaves like our enemy with instigation by Kaikeyi. 
I shall keep him imprisoned with out personal attachment or if necessary, kill him."

"Even a venerable person is to be punished, if he becomes arrogant, if he does not know 
good and evil actions and if he takes to a wrong route."

"Oh, Rama, the best of men! On what strength or season has he taken shelter to give away 
this kingdom belonging to you to Kaikeyi?"

"Oh, Rama the chestiser of enemies! Where is the ability for him to give kingdom to Bharata, 
by making great enmity against you and me "

"Oh, queen! Really, I am devotedly attached to my brother Rama. I am swearing an oath 
to you by truth by bow, by the act of giving and by the act of sacrifice."

"Oh, queen! If Rama can enter blazing fire or forest, you make certain that even before, 
I can enter there"

"I shall alleviate your grief, by showing my valour like the rising sun alleviating darkness 
.Let Rama and yourself see my valour"

Hearing these words of Lakshmana the magnanimous, Kausalya entirely given up to anguish 
and weaping, spoke thus to Rama.

"Oh, son !You have heard the words of Lakshmana .If you agree, you do what is to be done, 
immediately."

"It is not proper for you to go away from here, leaving me afflicted with grief, after 
hearing the un-just words spoken by my co-wife."

"Oh, Rama! You are righteous man. If you desire to practice virtue, be a virtuous man 
and stay here serving me thereby practicing the best morality in the form of serving your mother.

"Oh, son! Formerly Kasyapa was staying in his own house itself with self restraint, performed 
great austerity by serving his mother and went to heaven"

"Just as the king, by respectable feeling to you is worthy of worship, so also being 
your mother, I am worthy of worship to you. Hence, do not go to the forest"

"After your separation, I shall have no use of this life or comforts for me, it is good 
even to eat grass while staying with you"

"I shall not live if you leave for the forest, leaving me who is afflicted with grief. 
I shall seek death through starvation"

"Oh, son! If I fast myself to death for your sake, you will attain the universally famous 
hell, like the god of the ocean obtaining trouble because of his un justice behaviour, towards the sage 
called Pippalada, producing the latter's wrath."

The honest Rama spoke these virtuous words to his mother Kausalya, who was thus weeping 
miserably.

"I am not able to violate my father's words. I am bowing my head and asking your favour. 
I shall have to go to the forest"

"A sage called Kandu, who knew righteousness, who performed religious vows and who was 
a learned man, killed even a cow, acting as per his father's words"

"Previously, the sons of Sagara belonging to our race, were got bitterly digging up the 
earth, as commanded by their father."

"Parasu Rama, the son of Jamadagni personally slayed his mother Renuka in the forest 
with an axe as per his father's words."

"Oh, mother! These and many others who were equivalent to gods, did not make their father' 
s words to go waste. I shall also do what is desired by my father"

"Oh, mother! I am not the only person to act according to father's command. Those I have 
mentioned to you hitherto also complied with their father's command."

"I am not setting any new contradicting customary conduct for your sake. I am adhering 
to the way agreed and followed by the ancient."

"I cannot do otherwise than acting in accordance with father's words, the prevalent practice 
on earth. There is no deprivation indeed for anyone who complies with father's commands."

Rama, the best of those who speak skilfully and the best of all those wearing the bow, 
spoke thus to his mother and turned round to Lakshmana to speak.

"Oh, Lakshmana ! I know your highest affection towards me, your heroic valour ,your strength 
and your unassailable splendour ."

" Oh, Lakshmana, with good attributes! My mother is feeling a great and unequalled sorrow, 
by not knowing the secret of truth and tranquillity."

"Righteousness is the best of all qualities in the world. Truth is established in righteousness. 
Even these best words of father are enjoined with righteousness."

"One who follows righteousness, does not waste his promise given to one's father or mother 
or Brahmana."

" I cannot transgress my father's command. On the word given by my father only, Kaikeyi 
instigated me to go to the forest."

"Hence, leave this mean mentality of military heroism. Observe righteousness and not 
rudeness. follow my perception."

Rama spoke thus to his brother affectionately, bowed to his mother and with folded hands, 
spoke again to Kausalya as follows.

"OH, mother! I have decided to go to forest. Please give me permission. I am swearing 
to you on my life. Please invoke blessings on me."

"As sage king named Yayati in olden times left the heaven and reached back heaven again, 
I shall be back to the city from the forest, after fulfilling my promise."

"Oh, mother! Please do not grieve, Bear it well in your heart. I shall come back here 
again from the forest after fulfilling the father's command."

"You and I, Sita, Lakshmana, Sumintra and all of us should follow father's directions. 
This is an eternal custom."

"Oh mother! Please approve my righteous intention of going to the forest, duly withdrawing 
preparations for my coronation and keeping in check the sorrow in your heart."

The mother Kausalya heard the most virtuous, cool and steady words of Rama and rose, 
as though regained consciousness once more after death, looked at Rama and spoke thus again.

"Oh, son! I am also as respectable a person to you as your father, in my own right and 
due to great affection. I do not give permission to you. You cannot thus go away, leaving me in great 
sorrow."

"What is the use of my living in this world without you? What is the use of the other 
world or the oblation of food offered to the deceased ancestors or the nectar of immortality? Your proximity 
even for a moment is better than that of the entire world of living beings."

After hearing the pathetic lamentation of his mother, he was highly anguished, as when 
an elephant is removed highly from its way by men with flames of fire.

Rama, who was established in righteousness, spoke these words endowed with virtue, to 
his mother who was looking unconscious and to Lakshmana who was disturbed and exhausted with distress. 
He was the only person worthy of speaking thus at that time.

"Oh, Lakshmana! I always know your devotion towards me as well as your strength. But 
now, you are joining with mother in afflicting much trouble to me without looking at my opinion."

"Oh, Lakshmana! In obtaining the fruit of good works in the world, righteousness utility 
and free will are being considered. As a wife who is obedient, who is beloved and who is having good 
sons, good work yields all these three things."

"Only such an action, which is righteous, is to be initiated, leaving that in which wealth, 
desire and righteousness do not come together. One who is intested in wealth alone becomes indeed fit 
to be hated in the world. So also the one whose very essence is desire, cannot indeed be considered 
good.

"When father, who is venerable, a king and old-aged, commands an action either by anger 
or by extreme joy or by even desire, which right person will not perform it? Only a person who chooses 
to be cruel will not do it."

"I cannot avoid fulfilling the father's command completely. For both of us, he is an 
important person indeed to command us. To mother Kausalya also, he is the husband, the resource person 
and the personified law."

"while the righteous king Dasaratha is alive and especially when he is following his 
own righteous path, how the mother Kausalya can go out with me from here leaving the city like other 
widowed woman?"

"Oh, mother the queen! Permit me to go to forest. As Yayati returned to heaven by the 
power of truth, give me your power of blessings so that I can return here after completion of exile."

"I cannot keep back reputation and glory for the sake of kingdom alone. This cannot unrighteously 
long for this inferior kingdom."

Rama, the best of men, decided to go to Dandaka forest fearlessly with his prowess, consoled 
his mother, advised his brother by good thoughts and made hearty circumbulatory salutation to his mother.

undefined

undefined

undefined


That valiant Bharata, having come to himself a long time on obtaining consciousness,
saw his mother whose eyes were filled pitiably with tears, reproached her mother in the midst of
the ministers and said as follows:-


"I never desired for the kingdom nor consulted about this matter with even my
mother. I was not aware of the proposed coronation, which has of the been contemplated by king
Dasaratha; since I was staying indeed in a distant land, along with Satrughna."


"I was neither aware of the banishment of Rama to the forest nor about how the exile
of Lakshmana and Seetha have occurred."


Recognising the voice of Bharata the noble man, crying out in that manner, Kausalya
spoke the following words to Sumitra:


"Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, the doer terrific deeds arrived. I went to see that
far-sighted Bharata."


That kausalya who became pale with her demeanor, dirty and emaciated, speaking to
Sumitra as aforesaid, became agitated and absent minded and proceeded to Bharata's place.


Bharata, the younger brother of Rama on his part, along with Shatrughna started out
to Kausalya's place.


Seeing Kausalya who was afflicted with grief, who fell unconscious (on the way) who
was crying and who was an honorable woman with a noble mind. Shatrughna and Bharata wept in sorrow,
approached her painfully and embraced her.


Kausalya who was very much in sorrow , spoke the following words to Bharata: "you,
who have a desire for kingdom, have got this invincible kingdom ."Alas! By the cruel deed of
Kaikeyi, it was obtained by you soon!"


"The ruthless Kaikeyi condemned my son to wear garments of bark and sent him to
dwell in the forest: What merit has she gained from this?"


"Kaikeyi ought to send me too without delay to the place where my illustrious son
with a golden novel (the distinguished mark of Vishnu the god of creation) is there."


"Otherwise, I for my own satisfaction accompanied by Sumitra, placing in
front(carried by Brahmana) the sacred fire*** will happily set out to the place Raghava has
gone."


"Otherwise, you yourself ought to conduct me now, if you so desire, to the place
where my son, the tiger among men, is living as an ascetic."


"This vast kingdom, endowed with elephants, horses and chariots and stock piled with
grains and riches, has been made over to you by her."


Derided with these and other harsh words that he had not merited, Bharata was
extremely perturbed, as if a needle was thrust into an open wound.


His mind being perplexed and having lost his consciousness, Bharata then coming his
senses, wailed in many ways and fell at the feet of the queen.


Then, Bharata with folded hands, replied as follows to Kausalya who was encircled by
afflictions and weeping as aforesaid in many ways:


"O, noble woman! Why do you reproach me, sinless as I am, for those things that I do
not know anything? Nay, you know well of the greatest affection I have for Rama."


"May the mind of the one who in any way whatsoever allowed for the departure of my
elder brother the best of men who keeps up his promise, be closed to all the seriptures."


"May he who counseled the banishment of my noble brother become the slave of the
vilest scoundrels, may he answer the calls of nature in the face of the sun and may he kick with
his foot, a sleeping cow."


"With whose counsel my elder brother went to exile, to him let that sin incur, as to
a master who imposes the heaviest labour on his servant without remunerating him."


"with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, to him let that sin incur as
to those who seek to harm a king who protects his people as if they are his own children."


"May the guilt of a king, who taking the sixth part of the revenue of his people
fails to protect them, be fallen on them with whose counsel my elder brother went to exile."


"May the sin of those having given the promise for certain sacrificial fees to
priests in a sacrifice, breaks that promise, to be his with whose counsel my elder brother went to
exile."


"May the sin of him, who fails to observe the code of warfare followed by the
virtuous in a battle abundantly provided with elephants horses chariots weapons and men, be his
with whose counsel my elder brother went to exile."


"May that perverse wretch, with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile,
forget the subtle meanings of the scriptures taught with care by a wise teacher."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, never behold that
Rama having large arms and broad shoulders radiant as the sun and the moon and seated as he will be
on a throne."


"May that pitiless one with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur
the sin of partaking milk boiled with rice and sugar a cooked mixture of rice and peas with a few
species and a goat flesh without offering them to the gods and be lacking in reverence towards
teachers."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur the sins of
kicking the cows, of personally abusing the elders and of deceiving a friend too much."


"May that perverse wretch with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile
incur the sin of divulging a little abusing words about others spoken occasionally in secret and in
confidence, to him."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, become a non doer, an
ungrateful person; a desperate man, the one who has abandoned shame and the one who is worthy of
hate."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur the sin of
eating delicious food for himself alone when he is surrounded by his sons , wife and servants in
his house."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has departed; die issueless, failing to
secure a wife suitable for him and thus not fulfilling his religious duties."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has departed, not see a child through
his wife and in distress, may not get a full long life."


"That sin which was proclaimed in killing a king a woman, a child or an aged person
or in abandoning one's dependents let him (with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile)
obtain the same sin."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, obtain, tat= the sin
of nurturing his wife children and other dependents through sale of lacquer, liquor, flesh, iron or
poison."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, obtain the sin of
being killed while fleeing, at a time when a battle inspiring fear upon enemy's side has
commanded."


May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, wander about the
world, as a mad man with a wooden bowl in his hand, dressed in rags and begging for alms."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has departed, be given over to
infatuation and anger and be constantly involved in wine women and dice."


May the mind of man with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, never
take delight in righteousness? Let him indulge in un righteousness and become a distributor of
gifts for the undeserving."


"With whose counsel , my elder brother has gone to exile, let his various kinds of
riches got accumulated in thousands , be snatched away by robbers."


"That sin which was proclaimed on him who sleeps during both the twilights, let that
sin be obtained by him, with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile."


"Let him obtains that sin, which attaches to a man who practices arson, to a man who
violets his teacher's bed and to a man who cheats his friend."


"May he, with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur that sin of
not doing service to be god, to the manes and likewise to his mother and father."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, forfeit soon and now
from the region obtained by virtuous man, forfeit the illustriousness enjoyed by good men and the
righteous actions."


"May he with whose counsel, that long armed and broad chested elder brother has gone
to exile, fail to give due reverence to his mother and be condemned to idleness."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, possess many
dependents be without resources, be undermined with fever and disease and be forever in
distress."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur the sin of
falsifying the hopes of highly miserable destitute, who having their eyes looking up seek for
alms."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur the sin of
staying in fear of the king forever as a cunning man, a cruel man, a back biter, a dishonest man
and an unrighteous man."


"May the evil minded man, with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile,
incur the sin of ignoring his chaste wife, who having bathed after her course of menstruation.
approaches him for union having regard for the season favorable for procreation."


"May that stupid with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur the
sin of courting the consort of another disdaining his lawful wife and having forsaken his love for
piety."


"May he, with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur that sin,
which is obtained by a Brahmana who is issue less."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur the sin that is
attached to a person polluting the drinking water and likewise to a person who administers
poison."


"May he with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, incur the sin
attached to a person disturbing the worship going to be offered to a Brahmana (by another) and to
milking a cow having a young calf. " (of age less than ten days)


"To him, with whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, let that sin be
obtained of disappointing a person oppressed with thirst, even though water was available."


"With whose counsel my elder brother has gone to exile, let the sin be accorded to
him, who while standing on the road, merely witnesses a dispute between two divided groups without
trying to make peace between them."


"While thus counseling Kausalya, who was bereft of her husband and son, the prince
Bharata fell down, depressed as he was with anguish."


Kausalya spoke the following words to Bharata who was tormented with grief, was
quite distraught and who just uttered formidable imprecations in the aforesaid manner:


"O, son! My grief is further enhanced. By uttering the curses, you are indeed
racking my spirits."


"O ,son! Fortunately, your mind as it is endowed with nobility, has not swerved from
righteous path. You will obtain the world of the blessed, along with Lakshmana."


Thus speaking to Bharata who was devoted to his brother Rama, she took the valiant
Bharata to her lap, embraced him and wept aloud , as she was very much afflicted with grief.


Lamenting thus, the great soled Bharata distraught on account of grief, felt himself
about to swoon, with his mind crushed by the burden of grief.


To Bharata that night passed with grief in lamenting thus laying fallen unconscious
on the ground, sighing warmly again and again with his power of discernment having been lost.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Not finding his father there in his father's palace, Bharata went to his mother's
apartment to see his mother.


Beholding his son who was absent from home for long and returned, Kaikeyi was
delighted and then sprang up, leaving her golden seat to receive him.


Soon after entering his house, which was devoid of any splendor, Bharata the
righteous man, grasped the auspicious feet of his mother in obeisance.


Kaikeyi smelled (as mark of affection) the head of the illustrious Bharata, embraced
him, made him to ascend on her lap and started questions.


"How many days passed since you have left your maternal grand father's house? Is
there no travel fatigue to you, who have come speedily in a chariot?"


"O,son! Is your grand father doing well? Is Yudhajit, your maternal uncle doing
well? Were you happy in being absent from home ? Be good enough to tell me all?"


Affectionately enquired thus by Kaikeyi, the lotus eyed bharata, the prince,
narrated all to his mother.


"It is seventh day to me today since I left the grand father's house. Yudhajit, your
father as well as my maternal uncle are doing well"


"Carrying the gifts and jewels, given to me by the king who annihilates enemies my
followers became tired on the way and I arrived ahead of them"


"I came soon because of the horridness communicated by royal messengers. Let my
mother be good enough to tell that which I desire to ask her."


"This couch of yours, which is fit for rest and decorated with gold, is empty. These
men and women of Ikshvaku race do not appear to me to be cheerful."


"King Dasaratha mostly used to here in your house. Now, I am not seeing him. I came
here, desirous of seeing him."


"O, mother! I will grasp in obeisance my father's feet. Tell about him, as I ask
you. Or is he in the house of Kausalya the senior most of my mothers?"


Deluded by the greed for kingdom, Kaikeyi who knew everything closely, told the
terribly unpleasant news to Bharata, who did not know anything, as though the news was
delightful.


"King Dasaratha, your father who was having a noble nature, who was respect and
performing frequent sacrifices as well as a refuge to good men followed that path which all beings
follow."


Bharata, a righteous man with a noble descent and an honest man, hearing that news ,
immediately fell down on the ground, being exceedingly tormented by the grief for his father.


The mighty armed and heroic Bharata, raising his grievous and depressed voice,
cried, "Alas, I am undone' and lifting up his arms, fell down.


Then, Bharata of great majesty, who was enveloped in grief and whose mind was
troubled by reeling under the death of his father, lamented profusely.


"These beautiful couch of my father earlier used to enhance its charm with his
splendor, as the moon irradiates the stainless sky in the night at the end of a rainy season."


"Being unoccupied by my virtuous father, the same couch now is bereft of its glory,
like the sky without the moon or like the sea with its water dried up."


Covering his lovely face with a raiment, Bharata the first of those who are
victorious, with a proffond distress in his mind shed tears in lamentation.


Kaikeyi lifted up from the floor, her son Bharata, who was pained with sorrow,
looking like a god, who fell on the ground like a sala tree, cut off by an axe, appearing like an
elephant in rut, looking like the moon and sun,afflicted with grief as he was and spoke the
following words:


"O, the highly illustrious prince! Arise,arise! Why are you lying down? Gentlemen,
like you, respected in the assembly of men, do not grieve indeed."


"O, Bharata endowed with understanding! Your intellect, which follows good character
as well as sacred scriptures, has an authority to donate and sacrifice, ever shining as such like a
splendor in the abode of the sun.


Encircled by numerous afflictions, Bharata weeping for a long time , rolled over the
floor and replied to his mother as follows:


"Making up my mind that the king was either going to anoint Rama as a prince regent
or to perform a sacrifice, I cheerfully got into the journey."


"All this turned to be otherwise. By not beholding my father, who was forever
interested in my wishes and welfare, my heart is broken to pieces"


"O, mother! On what ailment did the king die, when I was not here? Rama and others
who performed purificatory rites by themselves for our father indeed fortunate."


"It is sure that the illustrious monarch does not know the fact of my arrival.
Otherwise, my father quickly would have indeed smelled my head, by bending me in affection."


"Where is the caressing hand of my dear father of unwearied action wipe away the
dust with which I am covered?"


"Announce soon about my arrival to Rama of immortal exploits, he who is a wise
brother to me, my father, my friend and to whom Iam a servant."


"An elder brother indeed becomes a father for a faithful man who knows
righteousness. I will grasp his feet in obeisance. He is indeed the refuge for me now."


"What did my father the king, who know virtue , who was forever pious, who was true
to his promise, who was strictly truthful, who was truly valiant and who was honorable, say?"


"I want to hear exactly the last message of my father to me." Thus requested by
Bharata, Kaikeyi spoke the following words in accordance with truth.


That high soled king, who was excellent in understanding the Universal spirit,
departed to the world, crying O, Rama, O, Sita, O, Lakshmana!'


"Your father spoke the following last words also, when he was abandoned by the
operation of time , like a huge elephant surrendered into a trap."


"Those men who are able to see Rama returning Sita and the mighty armed Lakshmana
are those who are fortunate enough"


Hearing the aforesaid pronouncement, which disclosed second unpleasant news, Bharata
was dejected. Becoming gloomy faced, he once again asked his mother as follows:


"Where did the virtuous Rama, who augments Kausalya' s delight go now along with my
brother Lakshmana and with Sita?"


Asked by Bharata in this manner, his mother started telling so greatly unpleasant
words, exactly as it had happened, as though they were very pleasant words.


"O, son! He, that prince Rama, wearing long narrow pieces of bark, went indeed to
the great forest of Dandaka, followed by Lakshmana and also sita."


Hearing these words, Bharata being aware of the glory of his race, doubted and
fearedwhether Rama was sent to exile because of his unrighteous conduct, if any and again asked his
mother as follows:


"Has not Rama indeed stolen the wealth of some Brahmana? Has not he done any harm
either to a rich or to a poor virtuous man?"


"Has the prince indeed not longed for the wife of another? Why was my brother Rama
expelled to the forest of Dandaka?"


Thereafter his mother, an unsteady woman, on account of her feminine nature began to
narrate her act which was the exact state of the case.


Kaikeyi, a fool thing herself to be learned, after hearing the queries of the
virtuous Bharata, delightfully spoke the following words:


"Not even a little of belonging to a Brahman was stolen by Rama,No harm was done by
him either to a rich or to a poor virtuous man. Rama does not even look with his eyes, the wives of
others."


"O, son! Immediately on hearing decidedly about the coronation ceremony of Rama by
me then, I asked your father to bestow kingdom to you and for banishment of Rama to the forest"


"Submitting to his own decree, King Dasaratha, your father has done all that was
requested by me. Rama along with Lakshmana and Sita too were sent into exile."


"That beloved son having not been seen, the very celebrated monarch was made
miserable by the grief for his son and obtained death"


"O, Bharata knowing righteousness! The king- ship may be taken charge by you now.
All this was indeed done for your sake in this manner by me."


"O, son! Do not dwell in grief and anguish. Dwell in courage. This city along with
the salubrious kingdom indeed is subservient to you."


"Hence, meet the chiefs of Brahmanas like Vasishta and others who know the rituals,
perform soon the sacred rites to the king and become crowned as a king yourself to the earth, being
not depressed in spirit.

undefined

undefined

undefined

After hearing the cruel words of Kaikeyi; King Dasaratha got disturbed and suffered great 
agony for a while.

"As it a day-dream or confusion of my mind? Or could it be an eclipse of my experience 
or a disease of the mind?"

Thinking over thus, the king could not make out on the spur of the moment what it was. 
Then, regaining consciousness, he felt tormented by Kaikeyi's words. Distressed and disgusted as a deer 
at the sight of a lioness and seated on the bare floor, he gave forth a long sigh like a highly venomous 
serpent fixed to a charmed spot through magic spells. Uttering words "what a pity!" the angry king fell 
into a swoon once more, his mind infatuated with grief.

Regaining consciousness after a long time and feeling much distressed and angry; the 
King spoke thus to Kaikeyi, as though consuming her with fire in his eyes

"Oh cruel woman of wicked conduct inclined to exterminate this race! What wrong has been 
done to you by Rama or by me?"

"When Rama is treating you in the same way as his mother, why are you bent upon harming 
only him?"

"By not knowing you as a female snake with fiery poison, you were admitted by me as princess 
in my house for my own self destruction."

"When all living beings extol the virtues of Rama, for what offence shall I forego my 
beloved son?"

"For what offence shall I forsake my beloved son; when the entire world of living beings 
extol the virtues of Rama?"

"Supreme delight comes to me on seeing my eldest son. My very consciousness is lost, 
if I fail to see Rama."

"The world can exist without the sun, a crop without water. But life cannot continue 
in my body, without Rama."

"Oh, sinful woman! Enough of it. Let this resolution be given up. I even touch your feet 
with my head. Be gracious to me."

"Oh, sinful woman! Why this most design has been conceived by you? If you wish to ascertain 
my kindly or unkindly feeling towards Bharata, let it be so. But the observation made by you earlier 
that glorious Rama, who is senior in the practice of virtue is my eldest son as it were, must have been 
uttered in order to coax me or to get service from him."

"Afflicted with grief by hearing Rama's proposed installation; you are tormenting me 
too much. Possessed by an evil spirit in a lonely house; you are subject to control of another"

"Oh, queen! In this Ikshhvaaku race, which is rich in good conduct, this very great misfortune 
has appeared, due to which your mind has been perverted

"Oh, large eyed one! Earlier you have not done anything unreasonable or repugnant to 
me. That is why; I do not believe what has been done by you."

"Indeed, Rama is on par with the great souled Bharata to you, for many times you were 
telling me stories illustrating this, Oh, young lady!"

"Oh, timid lady! How do you take delight in banishment for fourteen years of that pious-minded 
and illustrious Rama?"

"How do you take delight in the sojourn, in a most dreadful forest; of Rama with very 
delicate body and having his self held in piety?"

"Oh, the fair-eyed one! Why do you take delight in banishment of Rama, who is so pleasing 
to look at and who is so obediently doing service to you?"

"Rama always is doing service to you more than Bharata does. For that reason also, in 
your case, I do not see any speciality in Bharata."

In fact, who else other than Rama the best of men could do much more service to you with 
respect, with correct notion and in obedience?"

"No censure or calumny against Rama can come from the mouth of many of thousands of women 
or from numerous dependents maintained by me. Addressing gently all created beings with clear mind, 
Rama a tiger among men, captivates the people of his kingdom by his kind actions."

"Rama the valiant, conquers men by virtue, the poor through charity, the elders by service, 
the enemies in battle by his bow."

"Truthfulness, charity, austerity, sacrifice, purity, straight forwardness, learning, 
service to elders-these firmly established in Rama."

"Oh, Queen! How do you wish harm to that Rama who is richly endowed with honesty, who 
is equal to god and who is having splendour as of a great sage?"

"I do not remember an unkind word spoken by Rama, who always speaks kindly words to all. 
As such, how can I for your sake, break unpalatable news to Rama the beloved."

"What recourse is there for me other than Rama, in whom forgiveness, asceticism, self-denial, 
truthfulness, piety, gratitude and harmlessness towards living beings exist."

"Oh, Kaikeyi! You ought to bestow mercy to me, and old and miserable man who reached 
his end and is coaxing painfully to you"

"Whatever can be attained on earth, which has the sea an end, all that I can give you. 
Let not anger take possession of you

"Oh, Kaikeyi! I fold my hands in salutation to you. I am even touching your feet. Be 
a protector of Rama. Let not unrighteousness lay hold on me in this matter."

The fierce Kaikeyi again spoke these fiercer words to Dasaratha, who was burning with 
sorrow and was wailing as aforesaid, who had fallen unconscious and was tossing about as he was filled 
with grief, and was praying again and again for being speedily borne across the sea of grief.

"Oh, Valiant king! Having again boons, if you repent again and again how can you proclaim 
piety on this earth?"

"Oh, knower of what is right! When many royal saints assemble and converse with you, 
what will be your reply?"

"Can you say" a wrong was done to Kaikeyi, on whose grace I am living now and who protected 
me earlier?"

"Oh, King! You having granted boons indeed today, now talk in another way, creating blemish 
on other kings"

When there was a dispute between a hawk and a pigeon (who were no other than Indra the 
ruler of gods and the god of fire respectively), the ruler of Sibis* gave away his own flesh to the 
bird and king Alarka* by parting with his eyes, attained to the highest destiny.

"The ocean, having given a promise, never crosses its limits. Therefore, bearing in mind 
the previous occurrences do not violate the pledge given by you to me."

"Oh, the evil-minded! By giving up righteousness and by installing Rama in the kingdom, 
you want to enjoy life with Kausalya forever."

"Let it be unrighteous or righteous, real or hoax. There should be no change in whatever 
is promised by you for me."

"If Rama is coroneted, I shall indeed die before your eyes by drinking abundant poison 
now itself in front of you."

"If I have to see Kausalya, the mother of Rama receiving salutations even for day, death 
is indeed better for me."

"Oh, King! I swear to you an oath by Bharata and by myself that I will not be pleased 
with anything else other than sending Rama to exile."

Kaikeyi spoke words of such extent and stopped. She did not further reply to the wailing.

Hearing Kaikeyi's boons, asking for Rama's exile and Bharata's sovereignty which are 
very much unwelcome, king Dasaratha nevertheless was perturbed for a while and did not move his lips 
towards Kaikeyi.

He kept gazing with unwinking eyes towards his beloved queen Kaikeyi, who spoke such 
disagreeable words. The king could not become comfortable on hearing that utterance, which was unkindly 
to his heart filling with pain and sorrow and was as terrible as a thunderbolt.

Reflecting over Kaikeyi's resolve and her terrible swearing, Dasaratha heaved a sigh, 
uttering "Rama" and fell like tree which was cut off.

Then the king become like mental a mad man who lost his equilibrium like an ailing man 
getting upset and like a serpent losing it's fierceness.

The king spoke to Kaikeyi in a distressed tone as follows "By whom have you been taught 
this worthless thing which appears to be worthwhile? Like a woman whose mind has been perverted by an 
evil spirit; you are not ashamed to speak to me."

"In the beginning, I was not knowing your wavery conduct in this way. But now, I am seeing 
it in you. It is perverted."

"From whom has such fear cropped up in you, so as to seek Bharata to be seated on the 
throne and Rama to stay in the forest?"

"If you want to do favour to your husband, to the world at large and to Bharata, you 
give up this sinful intention of sending Rama to exile."

"Oh, cruel! Petty minded woman of sinful resolve and wicked deed! Which grievance or 
offence are you finding in me or in Rama?"

"With out Rama, Bharata will not in any case take possession of the kingdom of Ayodhya 
as I think him to be stronger in virtue than even Rama."

"Having uttered the words 'proceed to the forest!' How can I behold the pale face of 
Rama resembling an eclipsed moon?"

"How can I see that reasonable view of mine, which was well made in consultation with 
friends and decided, being foiled like an army destroyed by enemies? What the kings who came from many 
directions, will speak about me? 'Alas', this king Dasaratha, a fool was ruling this kingdom for such 
a long time!"

"When many virtuous and learned elders enquire me about Rama, what then shall I tell 
them?"

"Even if I tell the truth that Rama was sent to forest by me, hard-pressed as I was by 
Kaikeyi, nobody will believe it and think as untruth."

"What will Kausalya say to me if Rama proceeds to forest? What can I, having done an 
unkind act, reply to her?"

"Oh, Kaikeyi! Whatever Kausalya, who was always desirous of showing kindness to me, who 
was blessed with a pet son, who speaks kind words and who deserves to be kindly treated, was waiting 
on me like a maid-servant, like a friend, like a wife, like a sister and like a mother. But, for your 
sake, she was never treated kindly by me."

"That which was done good be me for you, is hurting me now even as a meal taken with 
forbidden sauces fills an ailing person with repentance."

Being apprehensive of seeing Rama being treated with contempt and his exile to the forest, 
how will Sumitra put faith in me?"

"Seetha, alas, will hear woefully two unpleasant, of me having befallen to death and 
of Rama seeking refuge in the forest."

"Alas! Like a Kinnara girl bereft of her partner at the side of Himalayan hill, Seetha 
with her grief will make me lose my life."

"Seeing Rama dwelling in a great forest and Seetha lamenting, I cannot indeed desire 
to line."

"Oh, Kaikeyi! Deprived of your husband, you can as such rule the kingdom along with your 
son. It is indeed impossible for me to survive, after Rama's exile"

"I considered you, a good and virtuous wife as you are, proving to be perpetually bad 
wife, as one, having drunk wine with poison, though possessing an attractive appearance, concludes it 
to be obnoxious."

"You used to speak to me very consolingly with untruthful gentle words like a deer being 
killed by a hunter after enticing it with melodious sounds."

"Venerable people gathered in the streets will reproach me who has sold away my son, 
saying that I am as bad as a brahmana who drinks wine. It is certain."

"Alas! How was distressing and how painful it is that I have to forbear your words! I 
got this type of trouble as an evil consequence earned in a previous life."

"Like a rope used for hanging up one's neck through ignorance; Oh sinful woman; you have 
been lovingly maintained by me, sinful as I am"

"Enjoying life with you, I could not recognise you as death. I touched you, like cobra 
touched with hand by a child in a deserted place."

"This world of living beings is certainly fit to curse me, such as I am; saying that 
Rama the great souled is deprived of fatherly protection by me, the evil-minded."

Alas! Extremely foolish is king Dasaratha; whose mind is lustful for a woman and sent 
his son to the forest."

"Emaciated by vow's, by study of Vedas and by service to his preceptors, Rama will indeed 
during the period of enjoyment, again undergo a great hardship."

"My son Rama is incapable of saying a second word to me to go to forest, he will say 
"Be it so."

"If Rama does contrary to my command to go to forest, it will be most welcome to me. 
But, Rama the darling would never do so."

"Rama, who is pure minded; cannot indeed conjecture my way of thinking. Having been told 
to go to the forest, he will say "Be it so."

"On Rama reaching the forest, Death will take me, who is condemned by all men and unpardonable, 
to the abode of Yama the god of punishment."

"Rama the foremost among men-having left for the forest and I having been dead, what 
sinful act can you think of the remaining people beloved of me."

"The queen Kausalya, after losing me, Rama and sons Lakshmana and satrughna, will be 
enable to endure the woes and will follow me to the abode of Yama."

"Having thrown Kausalya, Sumitra along with three sons and myself into tortures of hell, 
you be happy!."

"Being abandoned by me and Rama, the Ikshhvaaku dynasty which was eternal, which was 
adorned with qualities, which could not be disturbed, will now be protected by you by bringing disorder."

"If it becomes agreeable to Bharata to send Rama to exile, let not Bharata do funeral 
rite to me, when life has departed."

"Alas! My adversary! Oh, vulgar lady, Kaikeyi! Become satisfied with your desires! When 
I am dead consequent on Rama, the foremost of men, having proceeded to forest, you a widow along with 
your son will then rule over the kingdom."

"You are residing in my house with the designation of a princess. All fame, which is 
unequalled in this world and lasting insult as well as disrespect of men will fall to my share as to 
a perpetrator of sins.

"How can my beloved son Rama, who was hitherto travelling as a Lord time again in chariots 
elephants and horses, will move on foot in a great forest?"

How will my sin; in whose dining time; cooks wearing ear-rings used to prepare excellent 
food and drinks trying to finish their work before others actually survive by eating astringent bitter 
and pungent wild foods?"

"How having worn costly robes, will Rama who is deserving of lasting comforts, be in 
brown-red clothing on this earth?"

"Whose terrific and thoughtless words are these of one demanding Rama's exile to forest 
and the other of Bharata's consecration as king?"

"Women of course are deceivers, even occupied with selfishness. Let them be condemned! 
Here, I am not mentioning of all women but of Bharata's mother only."

"Oh, cruel woman of evil intent; given to pursuit of your selfish ends, you have a settled 
disposition to bring grief to me. What a mischief do you expect through me or through Rama, who is always 
doing benefit to you?"

"On seeing Rama plunged in adversity fathers leave of their sons and wives too their 
husbands. Not, even the entire world gets exasperated."

"I, for one, rejoice by seeing that son Rama in the form of a divine boy, adorned with 
ornaments coming in proximity to me. By seeing him again and again, I get rejuvenated."

"Active life may not be possible even without sun or even Indra (the wielder of thunder 
bolt) not pouring rain. But, my opinion is that not even one will survive, by seeing Rama departing 
from here."

"I lodged in my house, as one would one's own mortal enemy, you, who seek my destruction 
and are unfriendly. Alas, due to ignorance, a highly venomous female serpent has been held on my lap 
so long and therefore I am undone."

"Bereft of me as also Rama and Lakshmana, let Bharata along with you, rule over the city 
and the state. After killing your relatives, bring delight to my enemies."

"Oh, cruel natured! One who has struck a blow in adversity! When you violently utter 
such words now, why the teeth from your mouth have not fallen down, breaking into thousands of pieces?"

"Rama does not speak a word which is even a little malevolent or unkindly. He does not 
know how to utter harsh words. How indeed are you recounting the faults of Rama, who talks beautifully 
and who is always admired for his virtues"

"Oh, Kaikeyi, the black guard of Keka dynasty! You may faint away or flare up or perish 
or enter the earth split up into thousands of cracks! I will not act on your word which is very cruel 
and inimical to me."

"I do not wish the survival of you, who are destructive like a razor, always speaking 
falsely pleasing words, are of evil natured, disastrous to the family, intent upon burning my heart 
along with vitals and repellent to my mind."

"There is no life to me without my son. How can there be happiness moreover? From whom 
else can there be joy, while I survive? Oh, queen! You ought not to do an unfriendly act to me. I even 
touch your feet. Be gracious to me."

That king, who has been gripped in the heart his by his wife, who transgressed all bounds 
of decorum, he wailing like a forlorn child and not reaching Kaikeyi's both the feet which were spread 
along, sank down like an ailing man.

undefined

undefined

undefined


The high souled Dasaratha, while lamenting about the unworthy killing of that sage,
spoke further to Kausalya as follows:


Having done that great sin inadvertently, having my senses confounded and I being
alone, I thought of using my reason of what best can be done."


"Taking the best water fully in that pitcher, I went to that hermitage by the path
as directed by the young sage.


"There I saw the frail, blind and aged parents of the young sage. They were without
a guide to support them, as birds whose wings were cut-off. Without any other occupation, they were
narrating words only about their son. Having no protector and being immobile they lost the hope of
their son, because of me."


"With my mind afflicted by grief and worried about the impending peril, I fell a
prey to further grief after reaching the hermitage.


"Hearing the sound of my foot-steps, that sage spoke as follows: "O, son! Why are
you late? Give me the water soon."


"My dear son! Your mother is regretting why you are playing in water in this manner.
Enter the hermitage quickly."


"O, son! My dear! If any disagreeable thing has been done by your mother, or me,
you, as a sage ought not have kept it in your mind."


"We being helpless, you are our refuge. We being blind, you are our eyes. Our lives
are encircled around you. Why are you not talking with us?"


"As though fearful in mind to behold the ascetic, I spoke to him in a tone which was
indistinct inarticulate and without some consonants?"


"Having strengthened the firmness in my speech and having abandoned fear in my mind
by deliberate efforts, I told him of the alarm that awaited him of his son's death."


"I am Dasaratha, belonging to warrior- class. I am not your high-souled son. This
calamity created by my own act, despised by noble men, befell upon me."


"O, venerable sage! Wearing a bow in hand, I came to the bank of Sarayu River with
an intent to kill an elephant arrived to a ford (for drinking water) or any other wild animal."


"Then by me was heard the sound of a pitcher being filled with water. Guessing it as
an elephant, I killed it with an arrow."


"Thereafter, reaching the bank of the river there, I saw an ascetic lying dead on
the ground, with the arrow pierced into his heart."


"O, honorable sage! With a desire to kill an elephant by targeting the sound, I
released an iron arrow, and thus your son was killed (hit)"


"Approaching as per his request, closer to him who was suffering from pain, I took
out the arrow soon from his vital part."


"Soon after taking out the arrow, he worried about both of you the parents,
lamenting that you were blind and there itself he attained Heaven"


"Unknowingly and unexpectedly your son was killed by me. It has happened like that.
Let the honorable sage command me what to do in this matter."


Hearing that cruel news pronounced by me, confessing my sin, that venerable sage
could not resist his severe anger."


"That sage with great splendor, whose face was filled with tears and troubled by
sorrow, spoke with a sigh to me who came near him with joined palms"


"If you have not told me about this shameful deed yourself, O. king, your head would
have burst instantly into a hundred thousand pieces."


"A killing brought about by a warrior premeditatedly and in particular to a hermit,
would expel even Indra from his post."


"The head of a dispatcher of a weapon with a knowledge of the matter on a sage
established in austerity or such an unmarried student practicing sacred study, gets burst into
seven pieces."


"You are still surviving because you have done it unknowingly. Not even you, but
today the whole of Ikshvaaku dynasty would have been no more, if it is not the case."


"He spoke to me thus: "O, king! Now we want to see, as our last look, our son whose
body is drenched in blood, with his garment of deer-skin scattered from him, lying unconscious on
the ground and who is subjected to the dominion of Yama(god of death) . Take both of us to that
place."


"Thereafter, taking both of them, who were weeping profusely, to that place, I for
one made that sage and his wife to touch their son."


"Approaching their son, that miserable couple touched their son's body and fell on
it . Then, his father spoke as follows."


"My dear boy! You are not offering salutation to me, nor do you talk to me. Why are
you sleeping on the floor? Are you angry?"


"O, righteous son! I am beloved to you. Otherwise, see your mother. Why are you not
embracing, my son? Utter some words, O delicate youth!"


"Whose sweet and heart touching voice, reciting one sacred text or the other in
particular at the end of the night, shall I hear from now?"


"O, son! Who after taking bath, worshipping the goddess of dawn, and offering
oblations in fire, will be sitting beside me and talking confidently looking at me, as I was
afflicted with grief and fear?"


"Who will feed me, like a beloved guest is fed, with roots and fruits while I am
sitting without any work, without fetching anything and without having any guide making me to
walk?"


O, delicate youth! How can I support your mother, who is blind, aged and a poor
woman in a pitiable condition, longing for her son?"


"O, son! Come to a halt. Do not go to Yama's abode. You can proceed tomorrow with me
and with your mother."


"Bereft of you, afflicted with grief, without any protection in the forest and poor,
both of us also will come soon along with you to Yama's abode."


"Thereafter, seeing Yama, I shall tell these words to him. O, Yama! Excuse me. Let
this boy nourish his parents.' "


"The most glorious and high souled Yama, the guardian of the world will be obliged
to give this solitary imperishable boon in the form of fearlessness to me, who is in such a
condition."


"O, son! This criminal killed you. As it is true that you were sinless, you will
soon obtain the realms as reached by those who die fighting with weapons."


"O, son! Move on to that which is the highest state, which is obtained by the
warriors, who do not return even while being killed, from the direction facing their enemies in
battles."


"Obtain the destiny which was obtained by Sagara, Saibya, Dilipa, Janamejeya,
Nahusha and Dundumara."


"O, son! Obtain that destiny, which is obtained by all the sages, by those who
studied scriptures, by an act of austerity, by a gift of the land, by him who has maintained sacred
fire, who has taken a vow of marrying a single wife, who gifts a thousand cows, who are owed to the
service of the preceptor and that which is obtained by those who have abandoned their body (by
journeying to Himalayan Mountains, or drowning themselves in water or leaping into the flames)"


"The one born in the race of sages will not obtain an unsafe destiny. The person,
who killed you, my son, will obtain that bad destiny."


"Thus, that sage repeatedly wept there pitiably. Then he, along with his wife,
started doing the ceremony of offering water to his demised son."


"The pious son of the sage on his part, soon ascended the Heaven, wearing a
wonderful form along with Indra (the king of celestials) as a result of his own pious acts."


"That son of the sage who was together with Indra, talked to his parents. Consoling
his parents for a while, he spoke the following words."


"I obtained the supreme state because of my service to both of you. You will also
obtain soon my vicinity."


"The son of the sage, whose senses were subdued, thus spoke and by a wonderful aero
plane with beautiful form, quickly reached Heaven."


"That ascetic with great splendor along with his wife soon performed the ceremony
offering water to his dead son and spoke to me, who was standing near him with folded hands."


"O, king! You have made me, without a son, by killing my one and the only one son,
by an arrow. You kill me also now. I am not frightened about death."


"Since you have killed my holy son through ignorance, I shall pronounce a most
painful and very cruel curse on you."


"O, king! Even as I am suffering from agony now because of the loss of my son, in
the same manner; you will also die due to agony caused by the loss of your son."


"O, king! Since the sage was killed by you, belonging to the warrior class, through
ignorance, the son of killing a Brahmin will not take possession of you."


"A feeling similar to this, which makes the life awful and extinct, will indeed
quickly come to you, even as a merit accrues to the donor of a donation to the priest."


"Pronouncing the curse thus on me, that couple wept many times pitiably, placed
their body on the funeral pile and proceeded to heaven."


"O, Kausalya! The sin I myself committed through ignorance on that day, by invoking
an arrow and hitting an invisible object the sound of which was heard, I remember it now on
reflection over it."


"O, Kausalya! As a disease comes sometime after eating a nutriment mixed with
forbidden things, this present occurrence came as a result of the sinful act by me long ago."


"O, my dear lady! Those words of that noble sage, saying that I shall give up my
life due to grief for the loss of my son, have come true to me now."


"O, Kausalya! I am not able to see you with my eyes. Touch me well" Thus speaking,
King Dasaratha, terribly weeping said to his wife as follows:


"O, queen! The wrong that was done by me in respect of Rama was not befitting of me.
But the good that was done by Rama in my case was worthy only of him."


"Which wise man on this earth can abandon his son, even if he is of a bad conduct?
Which son, even if he is sent to an exile, cannot become angry with his father?"


"Can Rama now touch me or approach me forth with? Men who attained the world of Yama
(god of death) cannot even see their kith and kin."


"O, Kausalya! I am not able to see you with my eyes. My memory- power is fading
away. Messengers of Yama (god of death) are hastening me to come."


"What can be more sorrowful than the fact I am not able to see Rama, who knows
righteousness and who is a truly brave man, at the time of my death?"


"The grief arising out of non-appearance of that son, who performs unparalleled
actions, is parching up my life, as sun- shine dries up a water drop"


"They are not humans but celestials, who will be able to see again in the fifteenth
year, the beautiful face of Rama, wearing his handsome ear-rings."


"The fortunate can see the face of Rama, looking like a moon, with its eyes
resembling lotus leaves, with beautiful eye brows, with a comely row of teeth and a charming
nose."


"Fortunate are they, who can see the sweat smelling face of Rama, resembling the
autumnal moon and also a full- blown lotus."


"Happy ones can see Rama, who having finished his exile, will come to Ayodhya like
the planet Venus coming from a journey."


"O, Kausalya! My heart is sinking down by delusion of mind. I am not able to grasp
the related sound, touch and the smell."


"All of my senses are getting scared away due to mental break down, as rays of light
of a lamp whose oil is exhausted, starts splattering."


"This grief caused by my own self is collapsing me, who am helpless and insensible,
like a river bank being collapsed by the floods of a river stream."


"O, mighty armed! O, Rama! O, annihilator of my grief! Alas! O, darling of your
father! O, my protector! O, my son! Where have you gone?"


"O, Kausalya! O, Sumitra, the miserable! Alas! O, Kaikeyi, the cruel one! My enemy!
The disgrace of my family! I am going to die."


In this manner, King Dasaratha weeping as aforesaid, reached the end of his life in
the presence of Kausalya and Sumitra.


King Dasaratha of noble appearance, thus speaking, who was already miserable and
distressed for sending his son to exile, felt afflicted with extreme grief by the time the mid-
night passed and forthwith abandoned his life.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Seeing he had resolved to halt at that place for the night, the sage Bharadwaja
prepared to offer Bharata the son of Kaikeyi the full honours due to a guest


Then, Bharata said to Bharadwaja as follows: "Have you not presented me with water
to wash my hands and feet and offered me this hospitality fitting for a guest in this forest?"


Then, Bharadwaja smilingly replied to Bharata as follows: "I know you possess a
friendly disposition and you are pleased with whatever is offered to you."


"O, Bharata the excellent among men! I wish to offer food to your army. You ought to
fulfil my satisfaction in every suitable way."


"O, warrior! Why did you come here, leaving your army at a distance? Why did you not
come to my place with your army?"


Bharata, with joined palms, replied to Bharadwaja who was rich with austerity in the
following words: "O, venerable one! I have not come here with my army for the fear of displeasing
you."


"O, Venerable One! Either the king or the prince should always keep away from the
places occupied by ascetics"


"O, Holy one! Spirited horses, men and rare elephants in rut covering an immense
area are accompanying me."


"Let them not damage the trees, huts and ground and defile the waters of hermitages'
- in this thought, I came alone."


Thereafter Bharata, having been commanded by that great sage to bring the army
there, allowed the army's arrival to the hermitage.


Meanwhile, entering the fire-sanctuary (the place where the sacrificial fire is
kept), sipping water and wiping the lips, Bharadwaja invoked Visvakarma (the architect of gods) in
order to fulfil his duties towards the guests (as follows)


"I wish to offer hospitality to the guest I summon vishvakarma who is also the
divine carpenter. Let arrangements be made in that connection for me."


"I further invoke the three gods (Yama, Varuna and Kubera) the guardians of the
worlds with Indra as their king. I wish to offer hospitality to the guests. Let arrangements be
made in this connection for me."


"Let the rivers which flow towards the east and those which flow towards the west,
across the earth and in the aerial region now come together here from all quarters."


"Let some rivers flow with Maireya ( a kind of wine made from date palms etc) some
others flow with highly refined spirituous liquor and some others flow with cool water with a taste
of sugarcane."


"I invoke the celestials and celestial musicians Vishvavasu, Haha and Huhu as also
Apsaras (nymphs) belonging to the celestial and celestial musicians' race from all regions.


"I invoke the celestial nymphs called ghritachi, Vishvachi, Mishra Kesi, Alambusa,
Nagadanta and Hema as also Hima who has an abode made in mountains."


"I invoke the fair women who are attending on Brahma the Lord of creation - all of
them with their external appendages (like musical instruments) along with (their teacher)
Tumburu."


"Let that beautiful garden in the region of northern Kuru, presided over by Kubera
(the god of riches) always with its leaves which serve as raiment and ornaments, with its fruits in
the form of heavenly damsels appear in this place."


"Many the blessed moon-god (the duty presiding over annual plants) furnish me at
this place, excellent food of every variety, confections, sweets, sauces and syrups."


"May the blessed moon-god furnish me many-coloured flowers which have just fallen
from the flower-plants or trees, the drinks like wine and others as also various kinds of
meat."


That sage Bharadwaja, with his intense meditation, possessing unequal splendour and
with austerity, spoke as follows, in tones befitting proper articulation and pronunciation of the
scriptural texts:


While that sage Bharadwaja, with joined palms, was meditating with absorption in the
east, all those celestials came one by one.


Then, a pleasant comfortable and gracious breeze, passing over the mountains of
Malaya and Dardura, began to blw, removing sweat by its influence.


Thereafter wonderful clouds let loose a rain of flowers, while the sound of divine
gongs could be heard on every side.


Troops of Apsaras (divine nymphs) danced to the melodious rustling of the wind. The
clestials and the celestial musicians sang. Vinas, stringed musical instruments transmitted their
tunes.


Sweat and harmonious sounds emitted smoothly, entered the sky earth and the ears of
beings.


When those celestial melodies ceased so pleasingly heard by the human ears,
Bharata's army saw the wonderful creations of Visvakarma.


A levelled land of approximately twenty miles on all sides, became covered by many
carpets of grass, dark as emerald.


At that place, Bilva, Kapittha, Panasa, Citron Amalaki and Mango Trees laden with
fruit appeared.


A forest of divine enjoyments from the territory of northern Kuru's along with a
river shaped with various trees on its bank appeared there.


Splendid square mansions with stables for elephants and horses as well as
resplendent gates with watch-towers flanked by turrets were seen.


A royal palace emerged, dazzling as a cloud, pierced by splendid arches, hung with
white garlands, filled with fragrance of celestial perfumes, forming a perfect quadrangle,
spacious, furnished with couches seats and palanquins, supplied with ambrosial drinks of every kind
as well as magnificent attire and food of every variety, well-prepared eatables of every
description in cleaned vessels free from dirt and all kinds of seats arranged in order looked
charming with superb couches duly covered with rich carpets.


The mighty armed Bharata the son of Kaikeyi on invitation by the great sage, entered
that palace filled with precious gems.


All the ministers together with priests accompanied Bharata and on entering that
excellent get-up of the house, were filled with delight


Bharata along with his ministers went clock-wise round the excellent royal throne,
whisk and the royal umbrella kept there, as if they were utilized by a king.


They paid reverence to the royal seat, bowing before it, as if Rama sat thereon and
thereafter Bharata, taking hold of the whisk, sat down on the seat meant for the chief
minister.


All the ministers and priests sat down in order of precedence. Thereafter, the chief
of the army and at last the officer-in-charge of the encampment occupied their seats.


Then, on an instant, by the orders of Bharadwaja, streams having milk thickened with
rice in the place of mud, flowed towards Bharata.


On both the banks of those streams, enchanting and celestial houses plastered with
white clay born out of the grace of Brahma the Lord of creation, appeared.


At that moment itself, twenty thousand women adorned with beautiful ornaments, sent
by Brahma, arrived.


Twenty thousand more women, who were radiant and adorned with gold, gems, pearls and
corals came from the region of Kubera.


A particular company of Apsaras, embraced by whom, a man looked as though seized
with insanity, came from Nandana grove.


Those most excellent kings among celestial musicians - Narada, Tumbura and Gopa
whose radiance is like that of the sun, began to sing in front of Bharata.


Then, on the command of Bharadwaja, Alambusa, MishraKesi and Vamana started dancing
in the presence of Bharata.


By the command of Bharadwaja, wreaths of flowers which were beloved of the gods or
those which grow in the woods of chaitra ratha were seen at Prayaga.


By the command of Bharadwaja, Bel trees assumed the form of drummers, Vibhitaka
trees assumed the form of cymbalists and Peepul trees assumed the form of dancers.


Then, dcodars palmyras and Tilaka trees along with Tamala trees transformed into
hunch backs and dwarfs and joyfully arrived there.


Shimshapas (Ashoka trees), Amalakis (Emblic myrobalan), Jambus (rose-apple trees),
Malati, Mallika Jati and other creepers in the forest had been changed into dancing girls in the
hermitage of Bharadwaja and they spoke as follows:


"O, wine-bibbers! Drink the wine, however much you desire! O troops stricken with
hunger! Let milk thickened iwth rice and the meats which are very much fresh, be eaten (as you
will)"


Seven or eight young women bathed every single man on the beautiful river-banks,
after massaging their body with oil.


Women with charming eyes came running and shampooed their limbs. Lovely women
likewise wiped off the moisture on their body with towels and gave them beverages to drink,
mutually sharing them among each other.


The keepers of animals fed horses, elephants, donkeys, camels and bullocks (the
offspring of Surabhi the divine cow) with their suitable feed.


The animals, belonging to the exceedingly strong and illustrious warriors, the
descendents of Ikshvaku, were fed with pieces of sugarcane and roasted grain soaked in honey, duly
cajoling them to eat.


The groom did not recognise his horse. The elephant-keeper did not recognise his
elephant. That army there appeared intoxicated, maddened and enraptured on that spot.


With all their desires gratified, their bodies anointed with red-sandal paste, and
surrounded by a company of Apsaras, those soldiers uttered the following words.


"We shall not go either to Ayodhya or to Dandaka forest. Let Bharata be well!
Likewise, let Rama too be at east!"


Having obtained that hospitality, the infantry, the cavalry as well as those mounted
on elephants and their keepers too, no longer acknowledging their leaders, spoke the following
words:


In the height of joy, those men in thousands there, the retinue of Bharata cried
out, "This is verily of heaven!"


The soldiers in thousands, wreathed in flowers danced, laughed, sang and ran hither
and thither.


To those soldiers who had partaken that food which was as sweet as ambrosia, when
they saw again those fresh dishes, there arose in them a desire to eat them again.


Thousands of servants, slaves, youthful women and those in the army on every side,
clad in new raiment, became very much contented.


Elephants, donkeys, camels, bullocks, horses, animals and birds there were suitably
well-fed. Hence, one did not afflict the other.


There was no one seen in soiled attire or hungry or unkept or with hair powdered
with dust.


Dishes of goat and boar with delicious sauces were there and condiments that were
spicy, fragrant and succulent, cooked in fruit juices; vessels of rare metals filled with rice,
decorated with flowers, were offered in thousands to those soldiers there. The soldiers saw them
with wonder on all sides.


The wells in various sides of the forest (surrounding Bharadwaja's hermitage) have
their mud transformed into milk in which rice was cooked. The cows in the region were transformed
into cows of plenty and the trees dripped honey.


Some ponds there were endowed with full of wine and some were filled with assortment
of various dressed meats pertaining to deer, peacocks and wild cocks; cooked in hot pans.


There were thousands of portable furnaces, lacs of culinary utensils ten crores of
golden vessels, well-cleaned bowls filled with curds, small water-jars and wide-mouthed dishes.


Lakes full of fresh curds, shining fragrant and in the colour of a wood-apple, curds
mixed with sugar and spices, some other lakes filled with shite curds, some others filled with milk
soaked in rice as well as sugar and some other lakes with a mixture of barley and sugar were
formed.


Those soldiers saw jellies, powders and syrups made of fruits and various kinds of
accessories used in bathing, kept stored in vessels, on the banks of rivers.


Those soldiers saw there heaps of twings used for cleaning the teeth with white
brushes at their tips, white sandal pastes stored in caskets, polished mirrors, piles of clothes,
thousands of pairs of shoes and sandals, caskets containing collyrium for the eyes; combs, brushed,
raiments bows, protectors of vitals, strange couches and seats, drinking ponds for donkeys camels
elephants and horses, lakes with good stairs for descent having water-lilies and lotuses with
sky-blue colour, with clear water offering a comfortable bath and soft grasses having a colour of
Nipa tree and of cat's eye gems useful for feeding animals.


Seeing such a wonderful and dreamlike hospitality offered by the great sage
Bharadwaja, all those men were surprised.


While they were enjoying thus in that charming hermitage of Bharadwaja, in the same
manner as celestials enjoy the garden of Nandna, that night had elapsed.


Having been permitted by Bharadwaja, those rivers, the celestial musicians and all
those beautiful women went back by the same way they came.


The soldiers, intoxicated with spirituous liquor, were likewise excited with joy.
Likewise, the men were drenched in charming aloes and sandal paste. Various kinds of excellent and
charming garlands were there, crushed and garlands were there, crushed and scattered at distances,
likewise.

undefined

undefined

undefined


Rama saw Bharata, with matted locks, wearing bark-robes and, with joined palms,
lying on the ground, incapable of being seen as the sun at the time of the dissolution of the
world.


Rama recognized with some difficulty his brother Bharata, whose face became pale and
who was emaciated, and took him by the arm.


Smelling the crown of his head, placing him on his lap, Rama who was born in Raghu
dynasty embraced Bharata and with an absorbent mind, enquired of him as follows:


"My darling! Where is our father, that you have come to the forest? He, being alive,
you ought not have to come to the forest."


"I see you after a long time, coming from a far-off distance, wearing a mournful
face into this forest Alas! Why have you come to the forest, my darling?"


"My dear brother! Is the king alive, that you have come here? I hope the miserable
king has not indeed departed to the other world, all of a sudden."


"O, gentle brother! I hope the eternal kingdom has in a no way suffered from your
youthful experience. My darling! Are you rendering service to our father, who is truly
valiant?"


"I hope that the King Dasaratha is well, he who is true to his promise, he who
performs Rajasuya and Ashvamedha Sacrifices and he who has a righteous resolve."


"My darling! Are you treating respectfully as before that preceptor of the
Ikshvakus, the one who knows the sacred scriptures, the one who knows the sacred scriptures, the
learned who constantly keep up the virtues and he who has a great splendour?"


"My darling! I hope that Kausalya and Sumitra having good offspring are happy. I
hope the venerable queen Kaikeyi is rejoicing."


"I hope that the preceptor (Suyajgna the son of Vasishta); who is rich in humility,
a son of a noble family, who has a knowledge of many scriptures an unenvious person and who is full
of insight, is duly honoured by you."


"I hope that a brahmin who is versed in the traditions, who is intelligent and just,
employed in your sacred fires, always informs you in time, about a sacrificial fire having been or
going to be fed with oblations."


"My darling! I hope that you are holding in high esteem the gods, your ancestors,
dependents and teachers of your father's age the doctors and the brahmins."


"O, my darling! I hope that you treat with due respect; Sudhanva, your teacher in
archery, who is furnished with the most excellent arrows and darts and well-versed in political
economy."


"I hope that ministers who are valiant like you, learned, masters of their senses of
noble birth and skilled interpreting internal sentiments by external gesture, are assigned to
you."


"The source of victory for kings indeed comes from a concealed counsel by ministers,
who are well-versed in political sciences and who can hide their thoughts within themselves."


"I hope you do not fall a prey to excess of sleep and do wake up at appropriate
time. I hope you contemplate during the later half of the night, about the adroitness of an
action."


"I hope that you do not deliberate alone nor indeed with numerous men. I hope your
decision arrived at by you through such deliberation does not flow to the public (even before it is
carried out)".


"O, Bharata! I hope considering your interest fully, you lanuch an undertaking,
which has maximum benefit with minimum coast and indeed do not delay it further."


"I hope the other kings know your entire undertakings only after they have been
successfully completed as well as those which have taken a shape, but not your proposed
undertakings."


"My darling! I hope that others are not knowing, by their enquiries or strategies or
by any other approaches not mentioned, the details of discussions you make with your
ministers."


"I hope you solicit for one wise man rather than for a thousand stupids for, a wise
man can be of a great help to you in difficult matters."


"Even if a king employs thousands or tens of thousands of fools, they will not be
helpful to him."


"Even one wise, valiant sagacious and efficient minister alone can cause to secure a
great prosperity to the king or to one who enjoys royal authority."


"I hope that superior servants are assigned superior works only, mediocre servants
in mediocre works and inferior servants in inferior works."


"I hope you are appointing those ministers, who are eminent incorruptible, born of
the fathers and for bears of good family and who are full of integrity in matters of great
importance."


"O, Bharata! I hope your ministers do not watch as mere witnesses, while your
subjects in the kingdom wielding tremble with great fear, under your inflexible wielding of the
scepter."


"I hope those who perform the sacrifice do not hold you in contempt, as one who
accepts terrible gifts; as one who is fallen, as women hold in contempt of those highly lustful
men."


"He, who does not slay a physician skilled in ways and means of aggravating a
disease, a servant intent on bringing disgrace and a valiant warrior seeking kingly power, is
*himself) slain by them."


"I hope an army-chief, who is cheerful, wise, courageous, valiant, well-behaved,
born in a good family, who is beloved by his subordinates and efficient, is selected by you."


"I hope those warriors, who are excellent strong, skilled in war-face, whose
excellent actions were seen before and the most courageous ones are duly honoured and respected by
you."


"I hope you are regularly giving your army, the daily provisions and the suitable
salary to them, without any delay."


"When there is delay in giving bread and wages, the servants become incensed against
their master and become corrupt; and that is said to be a great unfortunate occurrence."


"I hope all the foremost descendents of your race (kshatriyas) are devoted to you
and do they lay down their lives steadfastly for your sake?"


"I hope that a knowledgeable man, living in your own country, a wise man a skilled
person endowed with presence of mind and the one who knows how to speak to the point, is selected
as an ambassador by you."


"Do you get to know throught three spies, each unacquainted with each other, about
the eighteen* functionaries of the enemies and the fifteen functionaries of your own side?"


"O, slayer of your Foes! I hope you do not forever think lightly of your foes, who
are weak and having been expelled, return again."


I hope are not honouring the materialistic brahmins, My dear brother! These men are
skilled in perverting the mind, ignorant as they are and thinking themselves to be learned."


"Reaching to their logical acumen, these men of perverted intellect preach
meaninglessly, in the presence of eminent books on righteousness."


"I hope you preserve the City of Ayodhya, furnished with everything and flourishing,
that was formerly inhabited by our heroic ancestors, O my dear brother, that is worthy of its name,
with its fortified gates, its elephant horses and chariots that fill it, with its brahmins,
warriors and merchants in thousands, ever engaged in their respective duties, with its noble
citizens self-controlled and full of energy, with its palaces in various shapes and the learned who
abound there."


I hope that the kingdom, adorned with peaceful places rich in temples and sheds
where water stored for distribution to passers-by in tanks, with happy men and women, graced by
social festivities, with land well-tilled, abiding in cattle which are totally free from cruelties,
the agricultural land not exclusively fed by rains, which is beautiful and is purged of beasts of
prey, which is completely rid of fears, studded with mines, a destitute of sinful men, and
well-protected by our fore-fathers, is prosperous and an abode of happiness.


"Are you cherishing all those who live by agriculture and cattle-rearing, O, dear
borhter! The people living on agriculture and cattle-rearing indeed prosper well."


"I hope their maintenance is being looked after by you, in providing what they need
and eschewing what they fear. All the citizens are indeed to be protected by a king through his
righteousness."


"I hope you are pacifying the women well. Are they protected by you? I hope you are
not believing the words of these women and not telling them the secrets."


"Are you supervising the woods inhabited by elephants? I hope female elephants are
there to you in good number. I hope you are not simply satisfied with the existing population of
female elephants, horses and male-elephants."


"O, Prince! Do you, regally adorned, appear before the people on rising each
morning, on the great high way?"


"I hope that all your servants, in your presence, do not adopt a disrespectful
attitude or on the other hand all of them do not hasten away on seeing you. Ofcourse, a middle
course only in the principle to be followed in this matter."


"I hope all your citadels are quite full of money, grain, weapons, water and
mechanical contrivances as well as artisans and archers."


"I hope your income is abundant and expenditure, minimum. I hope your treasure does
not reach undeserving people, O, Bharata!"


"I hope that your expenditure goes for the cause of divinity, manes, brahmins,
unexpected visitors, soldiers and hosts of friends."


"If one of noble work, despite his honesty and integrity, is falsely accused of some
offence, I hope he is not killed impatiently, without enquiry by those well-versed in
law-books."


"O, foremost of men! If a thief is seen and even caught at the time of his act on
sufficient ground and interrogated-I hope, he is not released from greed of wealth."


"O, Bharata! I hope that your well-educated ministers examine a case dispassionately
when a contention occurs between a rich man and a poor man, after studying the situation
carefully."


"The tears fallen from those who are the victims of false accusations, O Bharata,
destroy their sons and herds of those who are indifferent to justice, merely for the sake of
pleasure."


"I hope that you seek to conciliate by the following three means, viz. gifts, a
loving mind and polite words- the aged, the children and the foremost physicians."


"I hope you greet your teachers, the elderly, the ascetics, the deities; the
unexpected visitors, the trees standing at cross roads and all the brahmins of auspicious life and
conduct."


"I hope you do not abrogate virtue by your excessive devotion to wealth or your
excessive devotion to wealth or your earthly interests by your over-emphasis on religion or both
your religious and secular interests by your self-indulgence in pleasure, greed and gratification
of the senses."


"I hope your pursue wealth, religion and the delights of the sense dividing them all
according to time, O Jewel among the victorious, the one who is conversant with the proper time and
O, the bestower of boons!"


"O, the one who is endowed with great wisdom! I hope that brahmins versed in the
knowledge of the scriptures, the inhabitants of town and the country pray for your happiness."


Do you eschew the following fourteen for of kings -viz. atheism, falsehood, anger
carelessness, procrastination, disregard of the wise, sloth, bondage to the five senses, himself
alone devoting thought to the affairs of the state (without consulting the ministers); taking
counsel with those of perverted insight; failure to undertake the projects already decided, failure
to keep secrets, failure to utter auspicious words (at the beginning of an undertaking); and rising
from one's seat (indiscriminately) to receive all.


"O, the very wise Bharata! I hope you understand the following and deal them
properly the ten evils(1); the five kinds of fortifications(2); the four expedients(3); the seven
limbs of state(4); the eight evils (born of anger) the three objects of human pursuit(5); the three
branches of learning(6) subjugation of the senses, the six strategic expedients(7); adversity
brought about by divine agencies(8); and by human agencies(9); the twenty types of monarches(10);
and the entire population of the kingdom, setting about an an expedition, drawing up an army in a
battle-array and the two bases viz, peace and war.


"I hope that you consult with three or four ministers as mentioned in scriptures any
proposal collectively and singly with each of them in secret."


"Do you find advantages in your study of Vedas? Are your acts, production of fair
results? Do you benefit from the company of your consorts? Has your learning been fruitful?"


"O, Bharata! I hope that your conviction, is the same as mentioned by me in the
foregoing verses, which is conducive to long life, fame, religious merit, enjoyment and
wealth."


"Do you follow the common practice, which our fore fathers observed and which is in
accord with the path of the virtuous and which is distinguished in itself."


"I hope you do not eat by yourself nicely made eatable and do you share it with your
friends, who seek it?"


"A wise and learned king, having obtained and ruled the entire earth, properly by
righteousness and by administering justice to the people, indeed ascends to heaven when detached
from the mortal body."

undefined

undefined

undefined


That night having given way to dawn, the illustrious Rama with a broad chest spoke
(as follows) to Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra and who was endowed with auspicious signs :


"Oh, dear brother! This is the hour of sunrise. The auspicious night has departed.
That bird of dark plumage, the cuckoo, is singing."


"Oh, good brother! Hear the cries of peacocks resounding in the forest. Let us cross
the swift-flowing Ganga River that gushes to the sea."


Lakshmana, the delight of his friends, having understood the words of Rama, called
Guha as well as Sumantra and stood in front of his brother.


Hearing the command of Rama, Guha quickly received it, invited his ministers and
spoke to them as follows:


"Let a beautiful boat that is solidly constructed, sails well and a helmsman in it,
be brought to the bank to carry this hero across!"


Hearing that command, the chief minister of King Guha brought a charming boat to the
bank and reported the matter to Guha.


Then, Guha with folded hands spoke to Rama as follows: "Oh, Lord! Here, the boat has
arrived. What more can I do for you?"


"Oh, tiger among men! Oh, Rama resembling a son of divinity! Here is the boat for
you to cross the river, which flows into the sea. Oh, virtuous one! (Pray) get into it."


Then, Rama with great splendor, spoke to Guha as follows: "My desire has been
accomplished by you. Let us embark with all speed."


Having equipped themselves with a quiver each with arrows, fastening their swords
and armed with their bows, Rama and Lakshmana, with Sita, proceeded towards the river of Ganga.


Sumantra joining his palms in humility, approached Rama who knew what is right and
said, "What shall I do?"


Touching Sumantra with his auspicious right hand, Rama then said: "Oh, Sumantra!
Return quickly to the king's presence and be attentive in serving him."


"Go now, that your service to me has been completed. Abandoning the chariot, I shall
go on foot to the mighty forest," Rama said.


Finding himself dismissed, Sumantra the charioteer was distressed and spoke to Rama,
the tiger among men, as follows:


"None in the world has had to suffer such a fate as yourself; that you should have
to dwell in the forest with your brother and your consort as if you were an ordinary man!"


"I think that there is no reward in leading a life of religious student or in
studying religious scriptures or even in cultivating tenderness and straight forwardness, when
adversity has come to you."


"Oh, heroic Rama! Living in the forest along with Sita and your brother, you will
obtain the same position as one who has conquered the three worlds."


"Oh, Rama! We are actually ruined, in that, disappointed in our hopes by you too, we
shall fall under the sway of Kaikeyi the sinful woman and reap the suffering."


Sumantra the charioteer thus speaking, wept for a long time, stricken with grief,
seeing Rama, equal to his soul, departing to a distance.


Then, Rama again and again spoke these sweet words as follows to that charioteer,
whose tears got dried up and who had sipped some water and got himself purified:


"I do not see any one who is as great a friend of the Ikshvakus as you are. (Pray)
act in such a way that king Dasaratha may not lament about me"


"The king, his mind afflicted with grief, is aged as well. He is pressed down by a
burden of passion. Hence, I tell you this."


"What so ever act that high-soled emperor may enjoin you to do, with intent to
oblige the desire of Kaikeyi, it is to be done unhesitatingly."


"The kings indeed rule the states with this end in view that their will may not be
frustrated in any undertaking."


"Oh, Sumantra! Carry out everything in such a way that the said emperor neither
finds it unpleasing nor gets tormented by grief."


"Only after performing respectful salutation to the old and venerable king, who has
never known suffering and who has subdued his senses, you tell these words to him on my
behalf."


"Indeed neither I nor Lakshmana and Sita grieve for having moved from Ayodhya or
that we are going to dwell in a forest."


"After completing fourteen years, you will once more see Lakshmana, myself and Sita
too returned apace from the forest."


"Oh,Sumantra! This is what you should say to the king, my mother, all other queens
and Kaikeyi. Tell Kausalya again and again that I am keeping good health. Thereafter, convey
salutations at her feet on behalf of Sita as well as myself and Lakshmana the faithful man."


"Tell our salutations to the emperor too. Bring Bharata quickly. After his arrival,
Bharata may be installed in the position, as desired by the king."


"When you embrace Bharata and install him in the office of the Prince Regent, the
agony caused by the repentance felt by you on our account will not overpower you."


"Bharata too is to be told thus: "Treat without distinction all your mothers with
the same regard as you behave towards the king."


"As is your affection for Kaikeyi, so let it be for Sumitra and also the divine
Kausalya, my mother"


"If you accept the princely kingdom with an intent to please our father, it will be
possible for you to enhance happiness in both the worlds (in this world and the next)."


Sumantra, who was being sent back by Rama, was agonized with grief after hearing the
whole of that discourse and affectionately spoke to Rama as follows:


"If I spoke to you fearlessly in a friendly tone without following courteousness,
you ought to forgive my mode of expression, considering me as your devotee"


"How indeed can I return without you to that city, which through separation from
you, has been reduced to the state of a mother stricken with grief due to separation from her
son"


"By seeing my chariot on that day even with Rama in it, the people were lamenting so
much. Now, if they see the chariot without Rama the city of Ayodhya will even be broken
asunder."


"The city will be plunged in misery, like an army in which its commander is lost in
a combat with the charioteer alone surviving, on seeing this chariot without you."


"Thinking of you, who though residing far away are established foremost in their
minds, the people of Ayodhya must have been deprived of their food today."


"The great perplexity that ensued, on the occasion of your exile, among the people
(of Ayodhya), whose minds were depressed through grief on your account, was witnessed by you
indeed, Oh, Rama!"


"The cry of distress raised by the citizens (of Ayodhya) will be increased a
hundred-fold, when they see me with an empty chariot."


"Further, shall I say to the queen Kausalya as follows: - Your son, Rama has been
taken by me to the house of his maternal uncle, do not grieve'."


"I cannot tell such words too which are untrue. How can I tell, I abandoned your
son in the forest', which words are true but unkind?"


"How will the excellent horses obedient to me, which carried yourself, Sita and
Lakshmana, draw the chariot bereft of you?"


"Oh, the faultless Rama! For this reason, I cannot go back to Ayodhya. (Pray) permit
me to accompany you to the forest."


"If you leave me even though I solicit you to take me with you, I shall enter a fire
with chariot and all, here itself the moment I am forsaken by you"


"Oh, Rama! With the help of the chariot, I shall ward off those animals in the
forest, which create obstacles to your austerities."


"The pleasure of driving your chariot has been obtained by me because of you and it
is through you that I seek the happiness that comes in dwelling in a forest."


"Be graceful. I desire to become your close associate in the forest. I wish to hear
your loving assent with the words be my close associate!"


"Oh, hero! If these horses too can render service to you, they can attain a supreme
abode."


-"By all means, I am leaving for good, Ayodhya or even heaven. Dwelling in the
forest, with my head bent low, I shall render service to you."


"As a doer of wicked deeds cannot enter Amaravati, the capital of Devendra, so also
I cannot enter Ayodhya without you."


"This is indeed my desire that after reaching the end of your exile, I may take you
back to the city of Ayodhya in this very chariot."


"So long as I am with you together in the forest, fourteen years will slip away
momentarily. Otherwise than this, they will multiply a hundred- fold."


"Oh, prince, who are so fond of your dependents! You ought not abandon me, your
devoted servant, established in the path followed by the son of his master and (always)keeping
within bounds."


Rama, who was compassionate towards his dependents, spoke as follows to Sumantra,
who was miserably entreating him again and again in many modes.


"Oh, charioteer so fond of your master! I know your excellent devotion to me. Hear
wherefore I send you from here to the city of Ayodhya."


"Seeing you, returning to Ayodhya, Kaikeyi, my younger mother will get the proof
that Rama has gone to the forest."


"Having completely satisfied, about me having gone to forest, Kaikeyi will leave her
strong suspicion that the virtuous king may be a person who speaks untruth."


"This is my first priority that my younger mother should get the extensive kingdom,
protected by Bharata and thus ruled by her own son."


"For my pleasure and pleasure of the king, you go along with the chariot to Ayodhya
and inform all the matters that you have been asked to tell each in the way you have been asked to
do."


Having spoken thus to the charioteer, the courageous Rama consoled him again and
again. Then, he spoke the following reasoned words to Guha:


"Oh, Guha! This stay in the inhabited woods is not proper for me. My stay should
definitely be in a hermitage. Let an action diverted towards that aim be taken"


"I as such, wishing well of my father, Sita as well as Lakshmana and having taken up
a discipline to be followed by ascetics, want to proceed further, wearing matted hair. Please bring
the latex of a banyan tree."


Guha immediately brought that latex to the prince. With that, Rama made matted hair
to himself and to Lakshmana.


Rama, tiger among men who possessed long arms wore the distinguished mark of an
ascetic (in the shape of matted hair) . Then, Rama and Lakshmana the brothers clad in the bark of
trees and wearing a round mass of matted locks (on their head) looked bright like two ascetic
sages.


Having adopted the way of a hermit (temporarily) along with Lakshmana, Rama then
accepted the vow of an ascetic life and spoke to Guha, his friend as follows:


"Oh, Guha! Remain vigilant in defense, finance, internal security and public
relations, for a kingdom is the most difficult one to be protected!"


Then Rama, who was a delight to Ikshvaku dynasty, bade farewell to Guha and departed
quickly, remaining undistracted, along with his consort and together with Lakshmana.


Seeing the boat on the bank of the river and keen to cross the swift- flowing Ganga,
Rama spoke to Lakshmana as follows: -


"Oh, Lakshmana the tiger among men! You get into the boat stationed here unhurriedly
afterwards, having helped Sita the virtuous wife step into it."


Hearing the command completely of his elder brother, the prudent Lakshmana, by not
counteracting it, made Sita to ascend the boat first and stepped into it afterwards.


Then, the glorious Rama got into the boat himself. Thereafter, Guha the ruler of
Nishadas commanded his kinsfolk to row them across the river.


After ascending the boat, Rama too of mighty splendor then recited a sacred text
(daiviim naavam etc) fit for brahmanas and Kshatriyas alike and conducive to his own good.


Having sipped water as per scriptures and with extreme delight, Rama with Sita made
obeisance to that river. Lakshmana, of infinite splendor, followed suit.


Bidding farewell to Guha with his army of men and Sumantra, Rama sat on the boat and
directed the boatmen to move on.


Propelled by those splendid and vigorous oarsmen, that boat furnished with a pilot,
rapidly moved across the water.


Coming to the middle of Bhagirathi river, the irreproachable Sita with joined palms,
spoke as follows to the said river: -


"Oh, Ganga! Let Rama, the son of the emperor Dasaratha honor his father's command
under your protection! Having dwelled in the forest in full fourteen years, may he return once more
to your bank with his brother, Lakshmana and myself! Oh, blessed goddess Ganga! Returning safely,
with all my desires fulfilled, I shall worship you with great joy."


You, Oh goddess flowing through three regions (namely heaven, earth and subterranean
regions), include in your basin the realm of Brahma (the outermost of the six spheres enveloping
the earth) and are vividly seen on this terrestrial plane as a consort of the ocean king."


"Oh, charming goddess! I, Sita, greet you and extol you too. When Rama the tiger
among men safely returns and regains his kingdom, I shall give away a lakh of cows, soft clothing
and food to brahmanas with intent to please you."


"Oh, goddess! After reaching back the city of Ayodhya, I shall worship you with
thousand pots of spirituous liquor and jellied meat with cooked rice well prepared for the solemn
rite."


"I shall worship all deities dwelling on your banks as also sacred spots and
sanctuaries."


"Oh, irreproachable goddess! May the sinless Rama (with mighty arms) re-enter
Ayodhya again from the forest, along with Lakshmana and myself."


Thus praying to Ganga, the efficient and irreproachable Sita rapidly reached the
right bank of the river.


Reaching the bank and leaving the boat, Rama the best among men and the chastiser of
foes proceeded further along with Lakshmana and Sita.


Then, Rama the mighty armed, spoke to Lakshmana (who heightened the joy of Sumitra)
as follows:


"Security is an inevitable need in a forest, which has unforeseen dangers and is
uninhabited, Oh, Lakshmana! Go in front. Let Sita follow you."


"I shall proceed in the rear, protecting you and Sita. Oh, jewel among men! We must
accord protection here to one another."


"An act which has gone out of hand, whatsoever, cannot indeed be remedied again.
Sita will experience the hardship of staying in a forest only from now."


"Today she will enter the forest, where density of people is not seen, which is
utterly devoid of fields and gardens, has a rugged surface and is full of stumbles."


Listening to Rama's words, Lakshmana walked in front. Immediately after Sita, Rama,
the delight of Raghu dynasty, advanced.


Constantly gazing at Rama, who reached soon the other bank of Ganga River, the
distressed Sumantra, his vision having failed due to the long distance and perturbed as he was,
shed tears (of grief over separation from Rama).


Having crossed the great river, Rama the high-soled, the bestowal of boons, equal in
glory with the guardians of spheres, then reached progressively the prosperous and the happy land
of Vatsa; which contained rows of beautiful crops.


Having hunted there four deer, namely Varaaha, Rishya, Prisata; and Mahaaruru (the
four principal species of deer) and taking quickly the portions that were pure, being hungry as
they were, Rama and Lakshmana reached a tree to take rest in the evening.

undefined

undefined

undefined

